Pressure builds on GSA inspector general to review Trump’s D.C. hotel lease.
A group comprising 22 nonprofit organizations, liberal advocates, professors and ethical experts have written the inspector general of the General Services Administration — the agency that manages the lease for the Trump International hotel — asking that she review the recent decision by the agency to allow the president’s company to keep the lease while he is in office.

The letter’s signors include the Center for American Progress, Citizens for Responsibility and Ethics in Washington (CREW), Public Citizen, Common Cause and the Sunlight Foundation, as well as ethics officials from the Obama and George W. Bush administrations.

“Preventing conflicts of interest is imperative to ensuring that taxpayer-owned buildings are not used to inappropriately provide private benefits to government officials at the public’s expense,” they wrote.

Trump’s company operates from the federally owned Old Post Office Pavilion, which his company leases from the GSA despite a clause in the agreement barring any “elected official of the government of the United States” from deriving “any benefit” from the contract.

Last week, the GSA informed Eric Trump, the son of the president who overseeing the hotel, that the Trump Organization met the terms of the lease because the president had resigned from a formal position with the company and the organization had restructured an internal operating agreement so he received no direct proceeds from the D.C. hotel business while in office. The lease agreement was signed in 2013, well before Trump won election in November.

[Federal agency rules Trump’s D.C. hotel lease is in ‘full compliance’]

Leading Democrats on Capitol Hill have previously pressed the agency’s inspector general, Carol F. Ochoa, to step in. She said she was monitoring the issue.

Appointed to the post by then-president Barack Obama in 2015, Ochoa leads an agency with a mission to “detect and deter waste, fraud, abuse, and misconduct and to promote economy and efficiency in GSA operations.”

Liz Kennedy, director of democracy and government reform for the left-leaning Center for American Progress, said the GSA’s decision to clear the lease while the president oversees the agency warranted further inspection.

“The role of an inspector general is to make sure their agencies are carrying out their missions appropriately and we feel clearly here that the incorrect decision was made,” Kennedy said. “So we hope she would do her job responsibility.”

A spokeswoman for Ochoa declined to comment.

Current and former GSA officials have suggested that terminating the 60-year lease could leave taxpayers vulnerable to a lawsuit seeking tens or hundreds of millions of dollars. The GSA’s letter to Eric Trump repeatedly cited the financial benefits of the deal, including $3 million in annual rent payments to the government.

Kennedy argued that the language in the clause prohibiting elected officials “is just bright as day” and that collecting rent on the project was not a reason to ignore the issue.

“Fearing the consequences of upholding the rule of a law is not a reason to fail to uphold the rule of law,” she said.
People are starting to default on their risky auto loans, but this isn’t the next housing bubble
An increase in the delinquency of risky auto loans probably won’t send the U.S. economy into the doldrums the way the mortgage loan crisis did in 2008-09, but it will likely pinch car sales.

Borrowers are falling behind on most subprime car loans, but deep subprime consumers — those with credit scores below 550 — have deteriorated fastest, according to a report by Morgan Stanley.

Just like mortgages, many of those loans have been packaged into bonds, “securitized” in Wall Street parlance, and sold across the world to investors searching for yields in the wake of the financial crisis. Car loans was one of the best performing assets during that period.

Still, said Kevin Barker, a specialty finance analyst at PiperJaffray, the troubled auto loans are not likely “to create a financial crisis or cause major disruptions in financial markets.”
He cites several reasons for that. First, the car loans market, at $1.1 trillion, is a fraction of the $10 trillion U.S. mortgage market, according to the Federal Reserve. And auto loans are much shorter in length than 30-year mortgages, making it easier to spot trouble and prevent big losses from developing over many years.

“The credit cycle is short, so you will know pretty quickly when things start to improve,” Barker said. “You get hit and recover. It doesn’t take years and years and years.”

Risky auto loans actually play a role in keeping the economy going because people in rural areas, many of whom do not have access to public transportation, must have a car to get to work.

When labor conditions worsen, borrowers lose their jobs and cannot pay their loans.

“With unemployment at relatively low levels, we don’t see the auto market blowing up,” Barker said.

Since the end of the Great Recession, there’s been an explosion of auto loans as an improving economy and pent-up demand has spurred U.S. auto sales.

[How Fed hike will affect mortgages, car loans, credit cards]
“Looser credit standards after several years of low losses (2010-13), as well as heightened competition, and lower recovery rates on defaulted loans are contributing to higher losses,” according to a March 20 report by S&P Global.

Lower prices for used cars are also adding to the losses when lenders foreclose on the auto loan. The lenders are getting less for the repossessed cars than they had expected.

“When you repossess the car, the value you thought you would get is even lower, resulting in a higher loss rate,” Barker said.

The result is lenders are increasing the interest rates on loans. They also tend to tighten their due diligence by ensuring people have a job and a higher credit score. Those moves are expected to hurt the sales of new U.S. cars, which have been hitting record levels for several years.

Along the way, lenders loosened their requirements of borrowers.

Westinghouse files for bankruptcy, in a blow to nuclear power industry
Westinghouse, one of the most storied names in the nuclear energy business, filed for bankruptcy Wednesday, dealing a blow to the nuclear power industry and raising questions about the fate of four reactors under construction in the United States.

The filing also ends the marriage of Toshiba and Westinghouse, one of a handful of nuclear contractors left worldwide. When the Japanese giant — maker of products as diverse as medical devices and home appliances — bought the Westinghouse nuclear business in October 2006, it declared “the dawn of a new era for nuclear energy.” Together, the companies would make a “powerful combination,” Toshiba said.

A decade later, that combination has melted down. Toshiba has written off more than $6 billion in losses connected to its U.S. nuclear business, citing accounting problems, delays and cost overruns. And it has pulled back from new nuclear projects under discussion in India and Britain.

[Chaos at Toshiba: $6.3 billion write-down, chairman resigns, bankruptcy looms]

The crisis for Westinghouse and Toshiba coincides with President Trump’s effort to scrap former president Barack Obama’s Clean Power Plan and with continuing apathy in Congress and the administration toward adopting a carbon tax. Either of those measures would have been likely to improve nuclear power’s competitiveness with renewables or cheap natural gas, which have been gaining domestic market share.

The bankruptcy filing will trigger legal questions about whether Toshiba remains responsible for losses at Westinghouse and whether the utilities that own the reactors under construction will have to eat more of the cost of completing them. That could mean higher rates for consumers in those areas.

In seeking protection under Chapter 11 of the bankruptcy act, Westinghouse could still finish building those plants. Westinghouse said it has arranged $800 million in financing so that it can continue to serve customers while restructuring its business.

The collapse of Westinghouse also reverberates through the global nuclear business.

The company supplied the world’s first commercial pressurized water reactor 60 years ago, and half the world’s 430 nuclear power reactors have Westinghouse technology.

Westinghouse had claimed that its new AP1000 model reactor had passive technology and modular design that was safer, cheaper and faster to build. Many U.S. lawmakers and nuclear industry boosters said the AP1000 could augur in a “nuclear renaissance” in the United States.

The company is in charge of constructing four of these new model reactors at two sites. The first two are being built by a SCANA-led group at the Virgil C. Summer Nuclear Generating Station, about 20 miles northwest of Columbia, S.C. The other two, backed by Energy Department loan guarantees, are being built at Southern Co.’s Vogtle facility.

Yet Westinghouse stumbled at both sites. Although the AP1000 was supposed to be a standard design, changes were made in South Carolina. Westinghouse plans also included modules built in Lake Charles, La., that were supposed to fit together “like pieces of Lego,” a former regulator said. But Nuclear Regulatory Commission files say that faulty modules from Lake Charles forced Westinghouse to reweld them at the reactor sites.

Currently, the Vogtle project is $1.8 billion, or 29 percent, above budget and three years behind schedule. Angry about the delays and cost overruns, the owners of the nuclear plants filed claims against Westinghouse. A settlement was reached, but the legal battles are likely to restart.

Both South Carolina and Georgia allow utilities to charge ratepayers for power-plant construction still in progress. But the utilities must get approval from their public service commissions, which have forced the utilities to absorb some of the costs.

Southern Co. subsidiary Georgia Power, one of the co-owners of the Vogtle reactors, said it was “working with Westinghouse to maintain momentum at the site.” It said it would consult with the Georgia Public Service Commission and its partners “to determine the best path forward.” The company added that it would seek to hold Toshiba and Westinghouse accountable. Southern’s chief executive, Thomas A. Fanning, is in Tokyo for talks.

The United States relies on nuclear energy to provide about 20 percent of its electricity needs. Yet the 100 U.S. reactors, with an average age of 35, are getting old. Few nuclear contractors, many state-owned, can replace them. And many of those are struggling; shares of the French firm Areva have tumbled 84 percent over the past five years.

“As these units get decommissioned, to stay at that percentage you need more units,” said Dan Aschenbach, a senior vice president at Moody’s. “But you can’t get there if you cannot construct it.”

The Westinghouse bankruptcy also ends a chapter of nuclear energy diplomacy. The Pennsylvania-based Westinghouse, although owned by Toshiba, won U.S. political backing for its efforts to win contracts abroad. The administrations of George W. Bush and Barack Obama pressed the Indian government to buy reactors made by Toshiba-Westinghouse or Hitachi-General Electric. India was negotiating to buy half a dozen AP1000s.
But questions of liability in the event of an accident blocked deals in India. Although Westinghouse has nearly completed four reactors in China, it had hoped to capture a bigger share of the Chinese market. In China, too, Westinghouse has grappled with delays; it told the bankruptcy court the reactors would come online in late 2017 and early 2018 — four years late.

Toshiba has been shopping for a buyer for Westinghouse, but few firms are able or willing. Korea Electric Power Corp. has a nuclear engineering subsidiary. While Chinese nuclear firms might be interested in the Westinghouse technology, China has its own CAP1000. Moreover, the Trump administration must approve any sale to a foreign buyer.

“There is a lot of value in that design going forward, and a lot of the challenges are being dealt with right now,” said Jeffrey Merrifield, a former NRC commissioner now at the law firm Pillsbury Winthrop Shaw Pittman. He said there were “a variety of coalitions forming” of U.S. companies interested in purchasing all — or part — of Westinghouse.

Another wrinkle in the Westinghouse saga is the $8.3 billion in loan guarantees the Energy Department provided to help finance the Vogtle reactors. Those guarantees were given to the utilities, so taxpayers would not be liable for losses unless the utilities were unable to make payments.

“These AP1000s were a much better mousetrap for the nuclear industry,” said Peter Davidson, who directed the Energy Department’s loan programs office and is now chief executive of Aligned Intermediary, an investment advisory firm for climate projects. “It’s sad that there were so many implementation issues and delays. These are more arrows in the side of the large-scale nuclear industry.”

Tax reform may be coming early for small businesses
As the focus in Washington shifts to tax reform, many in Congress are preparing for a long battle pitting those who support lower taxes for growth against those that will insist on cutting spending to help offset decreased potential tax revenues.  The debate is likely to continue for the foreseeable future. But a Democrat and a Republican want to see small businesses get some tax reform sooner rather than later.

The Hill reports that Senators Bill Nelson, a Democrat from Florida, and Republican Susan Collins (Maine) are pushing through tax reform legislation aimed at small businesses and first introduced in the House by Rep. Vern Buchanan (R-Fla.). The legislation, called the Main Street Fairness Act, aims to ensure that small business owners like me don’t pay more taxes than big corporations.

The current corporate tax rate is 35 percent. However, most small businesses – like my own – file S Corporation tax returns. On an S Corporation return, my company’s profits flow through to my personal income tax return where it’s combined with my and my wife’s other income and then taxed at individual rates.  Those rates are as high as 39.6 percent. The Main Street Fairness Act would limit my top tax rate on my company’s earnings to the 35 percent corporate rate.

That’s a big thing, because any savings to my bottom line either gets re-invested in my business (translation: jobs), saved or distributed to me and then spent on consumer items. All of this is good for the economy.

“Small businesses are the cornerstone of our local economies, and this bill is just one way we can help them succeed,” Nelson said in a news release.

If tax reform does manage to happen in 2017 it could mean a corporate rate as low as 15 or 20 percent, and with this legislation the tax savings for many small business owners would be substantial. But we know in Washington that’s easier said than done. Even if there’s a delay in comprehensive tax reform, let’s hope Congress at least finds a way to get this legislation to the president’s desk for signing. It could be a great early start to something much, much bigger.