He opened the crate. Inside were four different-sized balls.

    "Right," said Wood. "Now, Quidditch is easy enough to understand,
even if it's not too easy to play. There are seven players on each
side. Three of them are called Chasers."

    "Three Chasers," Harry repeated, as Wood took out a bright red
ball about the size of a soccer ball.

    "This ball's called the Quaffle," said Wood. "The Chasers
throw the Quaffle to each other and try and get it through one of
the hoops to score a goal. Ten points every time the Quaffle goes
through one of the hoops. Follow me?"

    "The Chasers throw the Quaffle and put it through the hoops
to score," Harry recited. "So -- that's sort of like basketball on
broomsticks with six hoops, isn't it?"

    "What's basketball?" said Wood curiously. "Never mind," said
Harry quickly.

    "Now, there's another player on each side who's called the
Keeper -I'm Keeper for Gryffindor. I have to fly around our hoops
and stop the other team from scoring."

    "Three Chasers, one Keeper," said Harry, who was determined
to remember it all. "And they play with the Quaffle. Okay, got
that. So what are they for?" He pointed at the three balls left
inside the box.

    "I'll show you now," said Wood. "Take this."

    He handed Harry a small club, a bit like a short baseball bat.

    "I'm going to show you what the Bludgers do," Wood said. "These
two are the Bludgers."

    He showed Harry two identical balls, jet black and slightly
smaller than the red Quaffle. Harry noticed that they seemed to be
straining to escape the straps holding them inside the box.

    "Stand back," Wood warned Harry. He bent down and freed one of
the Bludgers.

    At once, the black ball rose high in the air and then pelted
straight at Harry's face. Harry swung at it with the bat to stop it
from breaking his nose, and sent it zigzagging away into the air --
it zoomed around their heads and then shot at Wood, who dived on
top of it and managed to pin it to the ground.

    "See?" Wood panted, forcing the struggling Bludger back into the
crate and strapping it down safely. "The Bludgers rocket around,
trying to knock players off their brooms. That's why you have two
Beaters on each team -- the Weasley twins are ours -- it's their
job to protect their side from the Bludgers and try and knock them
toward the other team. So -- think you've got all that?"

    "Three Chasers try and score with the Quaffle; the Keeper guards
the goal posts; the Beaters keep the Bludgers away from their team,"
Harry reeled off.

    "Very good," said Wood.

    "Er -- have the Bludgers ever killed anyone?" Harry asked,
hoping he sounded offhand.

    "Never at Hogwarts. We've had a couple of broken jaws but
nothing worse than that. Now, the last member of the team is the

    Seeker. That's you. And you don't have to worry about the
Quaffle or the Bludgers unless they crack my head open."

    "Don't worry, the Weasleys are more than a match for the Bludgers
-- I mean, they're like a pair of human Bludgers themselves."

    Wood reached into the crate and took out the fourth and last
ball. Compared with the Quaffle and the Bludgers, it was tiny,
about the size of a large walnut. It was bright gold and had little
fluttering silver wings.

    "This," said Wood, "is the Golden Snitch, and it's the most
important ball of the lot. It's very hard to catch because it's
so fast and difficult to see. It's the Seeker's job to catch
it. You've got to weave in and out of the Chasers, Beaters,
Bludgers, and Quaffle to get it before the other team's Seeker,
because whichever Seeker catches the Snitch wins his team an extra
hundred and fifty points, so they

    nearly always win. That's why Seekers get fouled so much. A game
of Quidditch only ends when the Snitch is caught, so it can go on
for ages -- I think the record is three months, they had to keep
bringing on substitutes so the players could get some sleep. "Well,
that's it -- any questions?"

    Harry shook his head. He understood what he had to do all right,
it was doing it that was going to be the problem.

    "We won't practice with the Snitch yet," said Wood, carefully
shutting it back inside the crate, "it's too dark, we might lose
it. Let's try you out with a few of these."

    He pulled a bag of ordinary golf balls out of his pocket and a
few minutes later, he and Harry were up in the air, Wood throwing the
golf balls as hard as he could in every direction for Harry to catch.

    Harry didn't miss a single one, and Wood was delighted. After
half an hour, night had really fallen and they couldn't carry on.

    "That Quidditch cup'll have our name on it this year," said
Wood happily as they trudged back up to the castle. "I wouldn't
be surprised if you turn out better than Charlie Weasley, and he
could have played for England if he hadn't gone off chasing dragons."

    Perhaps it was because he was now so busy, what with Quidditch
practice three evenings a week on top of all his homework, but
Harry could hardly believe it when he realized that he'd already
been at Hogwarts two months. The castle felt more like home than
Privet Drive ever had. His lessons, too, were becoming more and
more interesting now that they had mastered the basics.

    On Halloween morning they woke to the delicious smell of baking
pumpkin wafting through the corridors. Even better, Professor
Flitwick announced in Charms that he thought they were ready
to start making objects fly, something they had all been dying
to try since they'd seen him make Neville's toad zoom around
the classroom. Professor Flitwick put the class into pairs to
practice. Harry's partner was Seamus Finnigan (which was a relief,
because Neville had been trying to catch his eye). Ron, however,
was to be working with Hermione Granger. It was hard to tell whether
Ron or Hermione was angrier about this. She hadn't spoken to either
of them since the day Harry's broomstick had arrived.

    "Now, don't forget that nice wrist movement we've been
practicing!" squeaked Professor Flitwick, perched on top of his
pile of books as usual. "Swish and flick, remember, swish and
flick. And saying the magic words properly is very important,
too -- never forget Wizard Baruffio, who said 's' instead of 'f'
and found himself on the floor with a buffalo on his chest."

    It was very difficult. Harry and Seamus swished and flicked,
but the feather they were supposed to be sending skyward just lay
on the desktop. Seamus got so impatient that he prodded it with
his wand and set fire to it -- Harry had to put it out with his hat.

    Ron, at the next table, wasn't having much more luck.

    "Wingardium Leviosa!" he shouted, waving his long arms like
a windmill.

    "You're saying it wrong," Harry heard Hermione snap. "It's
Wing-gar-dium Levi-o-sa, make the 'gar' nice and long."

    "You do it, then, if you're so clever," Ron snarled.

    Hermione rolled up the sleeves of her gown, flicked her wand,
and said, "Wingardium Leviosa!"

    Their feather rose off the desk and hovered about four feet
above their heads.

    "Oh, well done!" cried Professor Flitwick, clapping. "Everyone
see here, Miss Granger's done it!"

    Ron was in a very bad mood by the end of the class. "It's no
wonder no one can stand her," he said to Harry as they pushed their
way into the crowded corridor, "she's a nightmare, honestly. "

    Someone knocked into Harry as they hurried past him. It was
Hermione. Harry caught a glimpse of her face -- and was startled
to see that she was in tears.

    "I think she heard you."

    "So?" said Ron, but he looked a bit uncomfortable. "She must've
noticed she's got no friends."

    Hermione didn't turn up for the next class and wasn't seen all
afternoon. On their way down to the Great Hall for the Halloween
feast, Harry and Ron overheard Parvati Patil telling her friend
Lavender that Hermione was crying in the girls' bathroom and wanted
to be left alone. Ron looked still more awkward at this, but a
moment later they had entered the Great Hall, where the Halloween
decorations put Hermione out of their minds.

    A thousand live bats fluttered from the walls and ceiling while
a thousand more swooped over the tables in low black clouds, making
the candles in the pumpkins stutter. The feast appeared suddenly
on the golden plates, as it had at the start-of-term banquet.

    Harry was just helping himself to a baked potato when Professor
Quirrell came sprinting into the hall, his turban askew and terror on
his face. Everyone stared as he reached Professor Dumbledore's chair,
slumped against the table, and gasped, "Troll -- in the dungeons --
thought you ought to know."

    He then sank to the floor in a dead faint.

    There was an uproar. It took several purple firecrackers
exploding from the end of Professor Dumbledore's wand to bring
silence.

    "Prefects," he rumbled, "lead your Houses back to the dormitories
immediately!"

    Percy was in his element.

    "Follow me! Stick together, first years! No need to fear the
troll if you follow my orders! Stay close behind me, now. Make way,
first years coming through! Excuse me, I'm a prefect!"

    "How could a troll get in?" Harry asked as they climbed the
stairs.

    "Don't ask me, they're supposed to be really stupid," said
Ron. "Maybe Peeves let it in for a Halloween joke."

    They passed different groups of people hurrying in different
directions. As they jostled their way through a crowd of confused
Hufflepuffs, Harry suddenly grabbed Ron's arm.

    "I've just thought -- Hermione."

    "What about her?"

    "She doesn't know about the troll."

    Ron bit his lip.

    "Oh, all right," he snapped. "But Percy'd better not see us."

    Ducking down, they joined the Hufflepuffs going the other way,
slipped down a deserted side corridor, and hurried off toward the
girls' bathroom. They had just turned the corner when they heard
quick footsteps behind them.

    "Percy!" hissed Ron, pulling Harry behind a large stone griffin.

    Peering around it, however, they saw not Percy but Snape. He
crossed the corridor and disappeared from view.

    "What's he doing?" Harry whispered. "Why isn't he down in the
dungeons with the rest of the teachers?"

    "Search me."

    Quietly as possible, they crept along the next corridor after
Snape's fading footsteps.

    "He's heading for the third floor," Harry said, but Ron held
up his hand.

    "Can you smell something?"

    Harry sniffed and a foul stench reached his nostrils, a mixture
of old socks and the kind of public toilet no one seems to clean.

    And then they heard it -- a low grunting, and the shuffling
footfalls of gigantic feet. Ron pointed -- at the end of a passage
to the left, something huge was moving toward them. They shrank
into the shadows and watched as it emerged into a patch of moonlight.

    It was a horrible sight. Twelve feet tall, its skin was a dull,
granite gray, its great lumpy body like a boulder with its small
bald head perched on top like a coconut. It had short legs thick
as tree trunks with flat, horny feet. The smell coming from it was
incredible. It was holding a huge wooden club, which dragged along
the floor because its arms were so long.

    The troll stopped next to a doorway and peered inside. It waggled
its long ears, making up its tiny mind, then slouched slowly into
the room.

    "The keys in the lock," Harry muttered. "We could lock it in."

    "Good idea," said Ron nervously.

    They edged toward the open door, mouths dry, praying the troll
wasn't about to come out of it. With one great leap, Harry managed
to grab the key, slam the door, and lock it.

    'Yes!"

    Flushed with their victory, they started to run back up the
passage, but as they reached the corner they heard something that
made their hearts stop -- a high, petrified scream -- and it was
coming from the chamber they'd just chained up.

    "Oh, no," said Ron, pale as the Bloody Baron.

    "It's the girls' bathroom!" Harry gasped.

    "Hermione!" they said together.

    It was the last thing they wanted to do, but what choice did
they have? Wheeling around, they sprinted back to the door and
turned the key, fumbling in their panic. Harry pulled the door open
and they ran inside.

    Hermione Granger was shrinking against the wall opposite,
looking as if she was about to faint. The troll was advancing on her,
knocking the sinks off the walls as it went.

    "Confuse it!" Harry said desperately to Ron, and, seizing a tap,
he threw it as hard as he could against the wall.

    The troll stopped a few feet from Hermione. It lumbered around,
blinking stupidly, to see what had made the noise. Its mean little
eyes saw Harry. It hesitated, then made for him instead, lifting
its club as it went.

    "Oy, pea-brain!" yelled Ron from the other side of the chamber,
and he threw a metal pipe at it. The troll didn't even seem to
notice the pipe hitting its shoulder, but it heard the yell and
paused again, turning its ugly snout toward Ron instead, giving
Harry time to run around it.

    "Come on, run, run!" Harry yelled at Hermione, trying to pull
her toward the door, but she couldn't move, she was still flat
against the wall, her mouth open with terror.

    The shouting and the echoes seemed to be driving the troll
berserk. It roared again and started toward Ron, who was nearest
and had no way to escape.

    Harry then did something that was both very brave and very
stupid: He took a great running jump and managed to fasten his arms
around the troll's neck from behind. The troll couldn't feel Harry
hanging there, but even a troll will notice if you stick a long bit
of wood up its nose, and Harry's wand had still been in his hand when
he'd jumped -- it had gone straight up one of the troll's nostrils.

    Howling with pain, the troll twisted and flailed its club,
with Harry clinging on for dear life; any second, the troll was
going to rip him off or catch him a terrible blow with the club.

    Hermione had sunk to the floor in fright; Ron pulled out his
own wand -- not knowing what he was going to do he heard himself
cry the first spell that came into his head: "Wingardium Leviosa!"

    The club flew suddenly out of the troll's hand, rose high, high
up into the air, turned slowly over -- and dropped, with a sickening
crack, onto its owner's head. The troll swayed on the spot and then
fell flat on its face, with a thud that made the whole room tremble.

    Harry got to his feet. He was shaking and out of breath. Ron
was standing there with his wand still raised, staring at what he
had done.

    It was Hermione who spoke first.

    "Is it -- dead?"

    I don't think so," said Harry, I think it's just been knocked
out."

    He bent down and pulled his wand out of the troll's nose. It
was covered in what looked like lumpy gray glue.

    "Urgh -- troll boogers."

    He wiped it on the troll's trousers.

    A sudden slamming and loud footsteps made the three of them
look up. They hadn't realized what a racket they had been making,
but of course, someone downstairs must have heard the crashes and
the troll's roars. A moment later, Professor McGonagall had come
bursting into the room, closely followed by Snape, with Quirrell
bringing up the rear. Quirrell took one look at the troll, let out a
faint whimper, and sat quickly down on a toilet, clutching his heart.

    Snape bent over the troll. Professor McGonagall was looking at
Ron and Harry. Harry had never seen her look so angry. Her lips
were white. Hopes of winning fifty points for Gryffindor faded
quickly from Harry's mind.

    "What on earth were you thinking of?" said Professor McGonagall,
with cold fury in her voice. Harry looked at Ron, who was still
standing with his wand in the air. "You're lucky you weren't
killed. Why aren't you in your dormitory?"

    Snape gave Harry a swift, piercing look. Harry looked at the
floor. He wished Ron would put his wand down.

    Then a small voice came out of the shadows.

    "Please, Professor McGonagall -- they were looking for me."

    "Miss Granger!"

    Hermione had managed to get to her feet at last.

    I went looking for the troll because I -- I thought I could deal
with it on my own -- you know, because I've read all about them."

    Ron dropped his wand. Hermione Granger, telling a downright lie
to a teacher? "If they hadn't found me, I'd be dead now. Harry stuck
his wand up its nose and Ron knocked it out with its own club. They
didn't have time to come and fetch anyone. It was about to finish
me off when they arrived."

    Harry and Ron tried to look as though this story wasn't new
to them.

    "Well -- in that case..." said Professor McGonagall, staring
at the three of them, "Miss Granger, you foolish girl, how could
you think of tackling a mountain troll on your own?"

    Hermione hung her head. Harry was speechless. Hermione was the
last person to do anything against the rules, and here she was,
pretending she had, to get them out of trouble. It was as if Snape
had started handing out sweets.

    "Miss Granger, five points will be taken from Gryffindor
for this," said Professor McGonagall. "I'm very disappointed in
you. If you're not hurt at all, you'd better get off to Gryffindor
tower. Students are finishing the feast in their houses."

    Hermione left.

    Professor McGonagall turned to Harry and Ron.

    "Well, I still say you were lucky, but not many first years
could have taken on a full-grown mountain troll. You each win
Gryffindor five points. Professor Dumbledore will be informed of
this. You may go."

    They hurried out of the chamber and didn't speak at all until
they had climbed two floors up. It was a relief to be away from
the smell of the troll, quite apart from anything else.

    "We should have gotten more than ten points," Ron grumbled.

    "Five, you mean, once she's taken off Hermione's."

    "Good of her to get us out of trouble like that," Ron
admitted. "Mind you, we did save her."

    "She might not have needed saving if we hadn't locked the thing
in with her," Harry reminded him.

    They had reached the portrait of the Fat Lady.

    "Pig snout," they said and entered.

    The common room was packed and noisy. Everyone was eating the
food that had been sent up. Hermione, however, stood alone by the
door, waiting for them. There was a very embarrassed pause. Then,
none of them looking at each other, they all said "Thanks," and
hurried off to get plates.

    But from that moment on, Hermione Granger became their
friend. There are some things you can't share without ending up
liking each other, and knocking out a twelve-foot mountain troll
is one of them.

    CHAPTER ELEVEN

    QUIDDITCH

    As they entered November, the weather turned very cold. The
mountains around the school became icy gray and the lake like chilled
steel. Every morning the ground was covered in frost. Hagrid could
be seen from the upstairs windows defrosting broomsticks on the
Quidditch field, bundled up in a long moleskin overcoat, rabbit
fur gloves, and enormous beaverskin boots.

    The Quidditch season had begun. On Saturday, Harry would
be playing in his first match after weeks of training: Gryffindor
versus Slytherin. If Gryffindor won, they would move up into second
place in the house championship.

    Hardly anyone had seen Harry play because Wood had decided that,
as their secret weapon, Harry should be kept, well, secret. But
the news that he was playing Seeker had leaked out somehow, and
Harry didn't know which was worse -- people telling him he'd be
brilliant or people telling him they'd be running around underneath
him holding a mattress.

    It was really lucky that Harry now had Hermlone as a friend. He
didn't know how he'd have gotten through all his homework without
her, what with all the last-minute Quidditch practice Wood was
making them do. She had also tent him Quidditch Through the Ages,
which turned out to be a very interesting read.

    Harry learned that there were seven hundred ways of committing
a Quidditch foul and that all of them had happened during a World
Cup match in 1473; that Seekers were usually the smallest and
fastest players, and that most serious Quidditch accidents seemed to
happen to them; that although people rarely died playing Quidditch,
referees had been known to vanish and turn up months later in the
Sahara Desert.

    Hermione had become a bit more relaxed about breaking rules
since Harry and Ron had saved her from the mountain troll, and she
was much nicer for it. The day before Harry's first Quidditch match
the three of them were out in the freezing courtyard during break,
and she had conjured them up a bright blue fire that could be
carried around in a jam jar. They were standing with their backs
to it, getting warm, when Snape crossed the yard. Harry noticed
at once that Snape was limping. Harry, Ron, and Hermione moved
closer together to block the fire from view; they were sure it
wouldn't be allowed. Unfortunately, something about their guilty
faces caught Snape's eye. He limped over. He hadn't seen the fire,
but he seemed to be looking for a reason to tell them off anyway.

    "What's that you've got there, Potter?"

    It was Quidditch Through the Ages. Harry showed him.

    "Library books are not to be taken outside the school," said
Snape. "Give it to me. Five points from Gryffindor."

    "He's just made that rule up," Harry muttered angrily as Snape
limped away. "Wonder what's wrong with his leg?"

    "Dunno, but I hope it's really hurting him," said Ron bitterly.

    The Gryffindor common room was very noisy that evening. Harry,
Ron, and Hermione sat together next to a window. Hermione was
checking Harry and Ron's Charms homework for them. She would never
let them copy ("How will you learn?"), but by asking her to read
it through, they got the right answers anyway.

    Harry felt restless. He wanted Quidditch Through the Ages back,
to take his mind off his nerves about tomorrow. Why should he be
afraid of Snape? Getting up, he told Ron and Hermione he was going
to ask Snape if he could have it.

    "Better you than me," they said together, but Harry had an idea
that Snape wouldn't refuse if there were other teachers listening.

    He made his way down to the staffroom and knocked. There was
no answer. He knocked again. Nothing.

    Perhaps Snape had left the book in there? It was worth a try. He
pushed the door ajar and peered inside -- and a horrible scene met
his eyes.

    Snape and Filch were inside, alone. Snape was holding his robes
above his knees. One of his legs was bloody and mangled. Filch was
handing Snape bandages.

    "Blasted thing*," Snape was saying. "How are you supposed to
keep your eyes on all three heads at once?"

    Harry tried to shut the door quietly, but --

    "POTTER!"

    Snape's face was twisted with fury as he dropped his robes
quickly to hide his leg. Harry gulped.

    "I just wondered if I could have my book back."

    "GET OUT! OUT!"

    Harry left, before Snape could take any more points from
Gryffindor. He sprinted back upstairs.

    "Did you get it?" Ron asked as Harry joined them. "What's
the matter?"

    In a low whisper, Harry told them what he'd seen.

    "You know what this means?" he finished breathlessly. "He tried
to get past that three-headed dog at Halloween! That's where he was
going when we saw him -- he's after whatever it's guarding! And Id
bet my broomstick he let that troll in, to make a diversion!"

    Hermione's eyes were wide.

    "No -- he wouldn't, she said. "I know he's not very nice,
but he wouldn't try and steal something Dumbledore was keeping safe."

    "Honestly, Hermione, you think all teachers are saints or
something," snapped Ron. "I'm with Harry. I wouldn't put anything
past Snape. But what's he after? What's that dog guarding?"

    Harry went to bed with his head buzzing with the same
question. Neville was snoring loudly, but Harry couldn't sleep. He
tried to empty his mind -- he needed to sleep, he had to, he had
his first Quidditch match in a few hours -- but the expression on
Snape's face when Harry had seen his leg wasn't easy to forget.

    The next morning dawned very bright and cold. The Great Hall
was full of the delicious smell of fried sausages and the cheer
ful chatter of everyone looking forward to a good Quidditch match.

    "You've got to eat some breakfast."

    "I don't want anything."

    "Just a bit of toast," wheedled Hermione.

    "I'm not hungry."

    Harry felt terrible. In an hour's time he'd be walking onto
the field.

    "Harry, you need your strength," said Seamus Finnigan. "Seekers
are always the ones who get clobbered by the other team."

    "Thanks, Seamus," said Harry, watching Seamus pile ketchup on
his sausages.

    By eleven o'clock the whole school seemed to be out in the stands
around the Quidditch pitch. Many students had binoculars. The seats
might be raised high in the air, but it was still difficult to see
what was going on sometimes.

    Ron and Hermione joined Neville, Seamus, and Dean the West Ham
fan up in the top row. As a surprise for Harry, they had painted
a large banner on one of the sheets Scabbers had ruined. It said
Potter for President, and Dean, who was good at drawing, had done
a large Gryffindor lion underneath. Then Hermione had performed a
tricky little charm so that the paint flashed different colors.

    Meanwhile, in the locker room, Harry and the rest of the team
were changing into their scarlet Quidditch robes (Slytherin would
be playing in green).

    Wood cleared his throat for silence.

    "Okay, men," he said.

    "And women," said Chaser Angelina Johnson.

    "And women," Wood agreed. "This is it."

    "The big one," said Fred Weasley.

    "The one we've all been waiting for," said George.

    "We know Oliver's speech by heart," Fred told Harry, "we were
on the team last year."

    "Shut up, you two," said Wood. "This is the best team
Gryffindor's had in years. We're going to win. I know it."

    He glared at them all as if to say, "Or else."

    "Right. It's time. Good luck, all of you."

    Harry followed Fred and George out of the locker room and,
hoping his knees weren't going to give way, walked onto the field
to loud cheers.

    Madam Hooch was refereeing. She stood in the middle of the
field waiting for the two teams, her broom in her hand.

    "Now, I want a nice fair game, all of you," she said, once they
were all gathered around her. Harry noticed that she seemed to
be speaking particularly to the Slytherin Captain, Marcus Flint,
a sixth year. Harry thought Flint looked as if he had some troll
blood in him. Out of the corner of his eye he saw the fluttering
banner high above, flashing Potter for President over the crowd. His
heart skipped. He felt braver.

    "Mount your brooms, please."

    Harry clambered onto his Nimbus Two Thousand.

    Madam Hooch gave a loud blast on her silver whistle.

    Fifteen brooms rose up, high, high into the air. They were
off. "And the Quaffle is taken immediately by Angelina Johnson of
Gryffindor -- what an excellent Chaser that girl is, and rather
attractive, too --"

    "JORDAN!"

    "Sorry, Professor."

    The Weasley twins' friend, Lee Jordan, was doing the commentary
for the match, closely watched by Professor McGonagall.

    "And she's really belting along up there, a neat pass to Alicia
Spinnet, a good find of Oliver Wood's, last year only a reserve --
back to Johnson and -- no, the Slytherins have taken the Quaffle,
Slytherin Captain Marcus Flint gains the Quaffle and off he goes --
Flint flying like an eagle up there -- he's going to sc- no, stopped
by an excellent move by Gryffindor Keeper Wood and the Gryffindors
take the Quaffle -- that's Chaser Katie Bell of Gryffindor there,
nice dive around Flint, off up the field and -- OUCH -- that must
have hurt, hit in the back of the head by a Bludger -- Quaffle taken
by the Slytherins -- that's Adrian Pucey speeding off toward the goal
posts, but he's blocked by a second Bludger -- sent his way by Fred
or George Weasley, can't tell which -- nice play by the Gryffindor
Beater, anyway, and Johnson back in possession of the Quaffle, a
clear field ahead and off she goes -- she's really flying -- dodges
a speeding Bludger -- the goal posts are ahead -- come on, now,
Angelina -- Keeper Bletchley dives -- misses -- GRYFFINDORS SCORE!"

    Gryffindor cheers filled the cold air, with howls and moans
from the Slytherins.

    "Budge up there, move along."

    "Hagrid!"

    Ron and Hermione squeezed together to give Hagrid enough space
to join them.

    "Bin watchin' from me hut," said Hagrid, patting a large pair
of binoculars around his neck, "But it isn't the same as bein'
in the crowd. No sign of the Snitch yet, eh?"

    "Nope," said Ron. "Harry hasn't had much to do yet."

    "Kept outta trouble, though, that's somethin'," said Hagrid,
raising his binoculars and peering skyward at the speck that
was Harry.

    Way up above them, Harry was gliding over the game, squinting
about for some sign of the Snitch. This was part of his and Wood's
game plan.

    "Keep out of the way until you catch sight of the Snitch,"
Wood had said. "We don't want you attacked before you have to be."

    When Angelina had scored, Harry had done a couple of
loop-the-loops to let off his feelings. Now he was back to staring
around for the Snitch. Once he caught sight of a flash of gold, but
it was just a reflection from one of the Weasleys' wristwatches,
and once a Bludger decided to come pelting his way, more like a
cannonball than anything, but Harry dodged it and Fred Weasley came
chasing after it.

    "All right there, Harry?" he had time to yell, as he beat the
Bludger furiously toward Marcus Flint.

    "Slytherin in possession," Lee Jordan was saying, "Chaser Pucey
ducks two Bludgers, two Weasleys, and Chaser Bell, and speeds toward
the -- wait a moment -- was that the Snitch?"

    A murmur ran through the crowd as Adrian Pucey dropped the
Quaffle, too busy looking over his shoulder at the flash of gold
that had passed his left ear.

    Harry saw it. In a great rush of excitement he dived downward
after the streak of gold. Slytherin Seeker Terence Higgs had seen it,
too. Neck and neck they hurtled toward the Snitch -all the Chasers
seemed to have forgotten what they were supposed to be doing as
they hung in midair to watch.

    Harry was faster than Higgs -- he could see the little round
ball, wings fluttering, darting up ahead - - he put on an extra
spurt of speed --

    WHAM! A roar of rage echoed from the Gryffindors below --
Marcus Flint had blocked Harry on purpose, and Harry's broom spun
off course, Harry holding on for dear life.

    "Foul!" screamed the Gryffindors.

    Madam Hooch spoke angrily to Flint and then ordered a free
shot at the goal posts for Gryffindor. But in all the confusion,
of course, the Golden Snitch had disappeared from sight again.

    Down in the stands, Dean Thomas was yelling, "Send him off,
ref! Red card!"

    "What are you talking about, Dean?" said Ron.

    "Red card!" said Dean furiously. "In soccer you get shown the
red card and you're out of the game!"

    "But this isn't soccer, Dean," Ron reminded him.

    Hagrid, however, was on Dean's side.

    "They oughta change the rules. Flint coulda knocked Harry outta
the air."

    Lee Jordan was finding it difficult not to take sides.

    "So -- after that obvious and disgusting bit of cheating

    "Jordan!" growled Professor McGonagall.

    "I mean, after that open and revolting foul

    'Jordan, I'm warning you --"

    "All right, all right. Flint nearly kills the Gryffindor Seeker,
which could happen to anyone, I'm sure, so a penalty to Gryffindor,
taken by Spinner, who puts it away, no trouble, and we continue play,
Gryffindor still in possession."

    It was as Harry dodged another Bludger, which went spinning
dangerously past his head, that it happened. His broom gave a
sudden, frightening lurch. For a split second, he thought he was
going to fall. He gripped the broom tightly with both his hands
and knees. He'd never felt anything like that.

    It happened again. It was as though the broom was trying to buck
him off. But Nimbus Two Thousands did not suddenly decide to buck
their riders off. Harry tried to turn back toward the Gryffindor
goal- posts -- he had half a mind to ask Wood to call time-out
-- and then he realized that his broom was completely out of his
control. He couldn't turn it. He couldn't direct it at all. It was
zigzagging through the air, and every now and then making violent
swishing movements that almost unseated him.

    Lee was still commentating.

    "Slytherin in possession -- Flint with the Quaffle -- passes
Spinnet -- passes Bell -- hit hard in the face by a Bludger, hope
it broke his nose -- only joking, Professor -- Slytherins score --
A no...

    The Slytherins were cheering. No one seemed to have noticed
that Harry's broom was behaving strangely. It was carrying- him
slowly higher, away from the game, jerking and twitching as it went.

    "Dunno what Harry thinks he's doing," Hagrid mumbled. He stared
through his binoculars. "If I didn' know better, I'd say he'd lost
control of his broom... but he can't have...."

    Suddenly, people were pointing up at Harry all over the
stands. His broom had started to roll over and over, with him only
just managing to hold on. Then the whole crowd gasped. Harry's broom
had given a wild jerk and Harry swung off it. He was now dangling
from it, holding on with only one hand.

    "Did something happen to it when Flint blocked him?" Seamus
whispered.

    "Can't have," Hagrid said, his voice shaking. "Can't nothing
interfere with a broomstick except powerful Dark magic -- no kid
could do that to a Nimbus Two Thousand."

    At these words, Hermione seized Hagrid's binoculars, but instead
of looking up at Harry, she started looking frantically at the crowd.

    "What are you doing?" moaned Ron, gray-faced.

    "I knew it," Hermione gasped, "Snape -- look."

    Ron grabbed the binoculars. Snape was in the middle of the
stands opposite them. He had his eyes fixed on Harry and was
muttering nonstop under his breath.

    "He's doing something -- jinxing the broom," said Hermione.

    "What should we do?"

    "Leave it to me."

    Before Ron could say another word, Hermione had disappeared. Ron
turned the binoculars back on Harry. His broom was vibrating so
hard, it was almost impossible for him to hang on much longer. The
whole crowd was on its feet, watching, terrified, as the Weasleys
flew up to try and pull Harry safely onto one of their brooms, but
it was no good -- every time they got near him, the broom would
jump higher still. They dropped lower and circled beneath him,
obviously hoping to catch him if he fell. Marcus

    Flint seized the Quaffle and scored five times without anyone
noticing.

    "Come on, Hermione," Ron muttered desperately.

    Hermione had fought her way across to the stand where Snape
stood, and was now racing along the row behind him; she didn't even
stop to say sorry as she knocked Professor Quirrell headfirst into
the row in front. Reaching Snape, she crouched down, pulled out her
wand, and whispered a few, well- chosen words. Bright blue flames
shot from her wand onto the hem of Snape's robes.

    It took perhaps thirty seconds for Snape to realize that he was
on fire. A sudden yelp told her she had done her job. Scooping the
fire off him into a little jar in her pocket, she scrambled back
along the row -- Snape would never know what had happened.

    It was enough. Up in the air, Harry was suddenly able to clamber
back on to his broom.

    "Neville, you can look!" Ron said. Neville had been sobbing
into Hagrid's jacket for the last five minutes.

    Harry was speeding toward the ground when the crowd saw him
clap his hand to his mouth as though he was about to be sick --
he hit the field on all fours -- coughed -- and something gold fell
into his hand.

    "I've got the Snitch!" he shouted, waving it above his head,
and the game ended in complete confusion.

    "He didn't catch it, he nearly swallowed it," Flint was still
howling twenty minutes later, but it made no difference -- Harry
hadn't broken any rules and Lee Jordan was still happily shouting
the results -- Gryffindor had won by one hundred and seventy points
to sixty. Harry heard none of this, though. He was being made a
cup of strong tea back in Hagrid's hut, with Ron and Hermione.

    "It was Snape," Ron was explaining, "Hermione and I saw him. He
was cursing your broomstick, muttering, he wouldn't take his eyes
off you."

    "Rubbish," said Hagrid, who hadn't heard a word of what had
gone on next to him in the stands. "Why would Snape do somethin'
like that?"

    Harry, Ron, and Hermione looked at one another, wondering what
to tell him. Harry decided on the truth.

    "I found out something about him," he told Hagrid. "He tried to
get past that three-headed dog on Halloween. It bit him. We think
he was trying to steal whatever it's guarding."

    Hagrid dropped the teapot.

    "How do you know about Fluffy?" he said.

    "Fluffy?"

    "Yeah -- he's mine -- bought him off a Greek chappie I met in
the pub las' year -- I lent him to Dumbledore to guard the

    "Yes?" said Harry eagerly.

    "Now, don't ask me anymore," said Hagrid gruffly. "That's top
secret, that is."

    "But Snape's trying to steal it."

    "Rubbish," said Hagrid again. "Snape's a Hogwarts teacher,
he'd do nothin' of the sort."

    "So why did he just try and kill Harry?" cried Hermione.

    The afternoon's events certainly seemed to have changed her
mind about Snape.

    I know a jinx when I see one, Hagrid, I've read all about them!

    You've got to keep eye contact, and Snape wasn't blinking at all,
I saw him!"

    "I'm tellin' yeh, yer wrong!" said Hagrid hotly. "I don' know
why Harry's broom acted like that, but Snape wouldn' try an' kill
a student! Now, listen to me, all three of yeh -- yer meddlin'
in things that don' concern yeh. It's dangerous. You forget that
dog, an' you forget what it's guardin', that's between Professor
Dumbledore an' Nicolas Flamel --"

    "Aha!" said Harry, "so there's someone called Nicolas Flamel
involved, is there?"

    Hagrid looked furious with himself.

    CHAPTER TWELVE

    THE MIRROR OF ERISED

    Christmas was coming. One morning in mid-December, Hogwarts
woke to find itself covered in several feet of snow. The lake froze
solid and the Weasley twins were punished for bewitching several
snowballs so that they followed Quirrell around, bouncing off the
back of his turban. The few owls that managed to battle their way
through the stormy sky to deliver mail had to be nursed back to
health by Hagrid before they could fly off again.

    No one could wait for the holidays to start. While the Gryffindor
common room and the Great Hall had roaring fires, the drafty
corridors had become icy and a bitter wind rattled the windows in
the classrooms. Worst of all were Professor Snape's classes down
in the dungeons, where their breath rose in a mist before them and
they kept as close as possible to their hot cauldrons.

    "I do feel so sorry," said Draco Malfoy, one Potions class,
"for all those people who have to stay at Hogwarts for Christmas
because they're not wanted at home."

    He was looking over at Harry as he spoke. Crabbe and Goyle
chuckled. Harry, who was measuring out powdered spine of lionfish,
ignored them. Malfoy had been even more unpleasant than usual since
the Quidditch match. Disgusted that the Slytherins had lost, he
had tried to get everyone laughing at how a wide-mouthed tree frog
would be replacing Harry as Seeker next. Then he'd realized that
nobody found this funny, because they were all so impressed at the
way Harry had managed to stay on his bucking broomstick. So Malfoy,
jealous and angry, had gone back to taunting Harry about having no
proper family.

    It was true that Harry wasn't going back to Privet Drive for
Christmas. Professor McGonagall had come around the week before,
making a list of students who would be staying for the holidays,
and Harry had signed up at once. He didn't feel sorry for himself at
all; this would probably be the best Christmas he'd ever had. Ron
and his brothers were staying, too, because Mr. and Mrs. Weasley
were going to Romania to visit Charlie.

    When they left the dungeons at the end of Potions, they found
a large fir tree blocking the corridor ahead. Two enormous feet
sticking out at the bottom and a loud puffing sound told them that
Hagrid was behind it.

    "Hi, Hagrid, want any help?" Ron asked, sticking his head
through the branches.

    "Nah, I'm all right, thanks, Ron."

    "Would you mind moving out of the way?" came Malfoys cold
drawl from behind them. "Are you trying to earn some extra money,
Weasley? Hoping to be gamekeeper yourself when you leave Hogwarts,
I suppose -- that hut of Hagrid's must seem like a palace compared
to what your family's used to."

    Ron dived at Malfoy just as Snape came up the stairs.

    "WEASLEY!"

    Ron let go of the front of Malfoy's robes.

    "He was provoked, Professor Snape," said Hagrid, sticking his
huge hairy face out from behind the tree. "Malfoy was insultin'
his family."

    "Be that as it may, fighting is against Hogwarts rules, Hagrid,"
said Snape silkily. "Five points from Gryffindor, Weasley, and be
grateful it isn't more. Move along, all of you."

    Malfoy, Crabbe, and Goyle pushed roughly past the tree,
scattering needles everywhere and smirking.

    "I'll get him," said Ron, grinding his teeth at Malfoy's back,
"one of these days, I'll get him --"

    "I hate them both," said Harry, "Malfoy and Snape."

    "Come on, cheer up, it's nearly Christmas," said Hagrid. "Tell
yeh what, come with me an' see the Great Hall, looks a treat."

    So the three of them followed Hagrid and his tree off to -the
Great Hall, where Professor McGonagall and Professor Flitwick were
busy with the Christmas decorations.

    "Ah, Hagrid, the last tree -- put it in the far corner,
would you?"

    The hall looked spectacular. Festoons of holly and mistletoe hung
all around the walls, and no less than twelve towering Christmas
trees stood around the room, some sparkling with tiny icicles,
some glittering with hundreds of candles.

    "How many days you got left until yer holidays?" Hagrid asked.

    "Just one," said Hermione. "And that reminds me -Harry, Ron,
we've got half an hour before lunch, we should be in the library."

    "Oh yeah, you're right," said Ron, tearing his eyes away from
Professor Flitwick, who had golden bubbles blossoming out of his
wand and was trailing them over the branches of the new tree.

    "The library?" said Hagrid, following them out of the hall. "Just
before the holidays? Bit keen, aren't yeh?"

    "Oh, we're not working," Harry told him brightly. "Ever since you
mentioned Nicolas Flamel we've been trying to find out who he is."

    "You what?" Hagrid looked shocked. "Listen here -- I've told
yeh -- drop it. It's nothin' to you what that dog's guardin'."

    "We just want to know who Nicolas Flamel is, that's all,"
said Hermione.

    "Unless you'd like to tell us and save us the trouble?" Harry
added. "We must've been through hundreds of books already and we
can't find him anywhere -- just give us a hint -- I know I've read
his name somewhere."

    "I'm sayin' nothin, said Hagrid flatly.

    "Just have to find out for ourselves, then," said Ron, and they
left Hagrid looking disgruntled and hurried off to the library.

    They had indeed been searching books for Flamel's name ever
since Hagrid had let it slip, because how else were they going to
find out what Snape was trying to steal? The trouble was, it was
very hard to know where to begin, not knowing what Flamel might
have done to get himself into a book. He wasn't in Great Wizards
of the Twentieth Century, or Notable Magical Names of Our Time;
he was missing, too, from Important Modern Magical Discoveries,
and A Study of Recent Developments in Wizardry. And then, of course,
there was the sheer size of the library; tens of thousands of books;
thousands of shelves; hundreds of narrow rows.

    Hermione took out a list of subjects and titles she had
decided to search while Ron strode off down a row of books and
started pulling them off the shelves at random. Harry wandered
over to the Restricted Section. He had been wondering for a while
if Flamel wasn't somewhere in there. Unfortunately, you needed a
specially signed note from one of the teachers to look in any of
the restricted books, and he knew he'd never get one. These were
the books containing powerful Dark Magic never taught at Hogwarts,
and only read by older students studying advanced Defense Against
the Dark Arts.

    "What are you looking for, boy?"

    "Nothing," said Harry.

    Madam Pince the librarian brandished a feather duster at him.

    "You'd better get out, then. Go on -- out!"

    Wishing he'd been a bit quicker at thinking up some story,
Harry left the library. He, Ron, and Hermione had already agreed
they'd better not ask Madam Pince where they could find Flamel. They
were sure she'd be able to tell them, but they couldn't risk Snape
hearing what they were up to.

    Harry waited outside in the corridor to see if the other two had
found anything, but he wasn't very hopeful. They had been looking
for two weeks, after A, but as they only had odd moments between
lessons it wasn't surprising they'd found nothing. What they really
needed was a nice long search without Madam Pince breathing down
their necks.

    Five minutes later, Ron and Hermione joined him, shaking their
heads. They went off to lunch.

    "You will keep looking while I'm away, won't you?" said
Hermione. "And send me an owl if you find anything."

    "And you could ask your parents if they know who Flamel is,"
said Ron. "It'd be safe to ask them."

    "Very safe, as they're both dentists," said Hermione.

    Once the holidays had started, Ron and Harry were having too
good a time to think much about Flamel. They had the dormitory to
themselves and the common room was far emptier than usual, so they
were able to get the good armchairs by the fire. They sat by the
hour eating anything they could spear on a toasting fork -- bread,
English muffins, marshmallows -- and plotting ways of getting Malfoy
expelled, which were fun to talk about even if they wouldn't work.

    Ron also started teaching Harry wizard chess. This was exactly
like Muggle chess except that the figures were alive, which made
it a lot like directing troops in battle. Ron's set was very old
and battered. Like everything else he owned, it had once belonged to
someone else in his family -- in this case, his grandfather. However,
old chessmen weren't a drawback at all. Ron knew them so well he
never had trouble getting them to do what he wanted.

    Harry played with chessmen Seamus Finnigan had lent him, and
they didn't trust him at all. He wasn't a very good player yet
and they kept shouting different bits of advice at him, which was
confusing. "Don't send me there, can't you see his knight? Send him,
we can afford to lose him." On Christmas Eve, Harry went to bed
looking forward to the next day for the food and the fun, but not
expecting any presents at all. When he woke early in the morning,
however, the first thing he saw was a small pile of packages at
the foot of his bed.

    "Merry Christmas," said Ron sleepily as Harry scrambled out of
bed and pulled on his bathrobe.

    "You, too," said Harry. "Will you look at this? I've got some
presents!"

    "What did you expect, turnips?" said Ron, turning to his own
pile, which was a lot bigger than Harry's.

    Harry picked up the top parcel. It was wrapped in thick brown
paper and scrawled across it was To Harry, from Hagrid. Inside
was a roughly cut wooden flute. Hagrid had obviously whittled it
himself. Harry blew it -- it sounded a bit like an owl.

    A second, very small parcel contained a note.

    We received your message and enclose your Christmas present. From
Uncle Vernon and Aunt Petunia. Taped to the note was a fifty-pence
piece.

    "That's friendly," said Harry.

    Ron was fascinated by the fifty pence.

    "Weird!" he said, 'NMat a shape! This is money?"

    "You can keep it," said Harry, laughing at how pleased Ron
was. "Hagrid and my aunt and uncle -- so who sent these?"

    "I think I know who that one's from," said Ron, turning a bit
pink and pointing to a very lumpy parcel. "My mom. I told her you
didn't expect any presents and -- oh, no," he groaned, "she's made
you a Weasley sweater."

    Harry had torn open the parcel to find a thick, hand-knitted
sweater in emerald green and a large box of homemade fudge.

    "Every year she makes us a sweater," said Ron, unwrapping his
own, "and mine's always maroon."

    "That's really nice of her," said Harry, trying the fudge,
which was very tasty.

    His next present also contained candy -- a large box of Chocolate
Frogs from Hermione.

    This only left one parcel. Harry picked it up and felt it. It
was very light. He unwrapped it.

    Something fluid and silvery gray went slithering to the floor
where it lay in gleaming folds. Ron gasped.

    "I've heard of those," he said in a hushed voice, dropping the
box of Every Flavor Beans he'd gotten from Hermione. "If that's
what I think it is -- they're really rare, and really valuable."

    "What is it?"

    Harry picked the shining, silvery cloth off the floor. It was
strange to the touch, like water woven into material.

    "It's an invisibility cloak," said Ron, a look of awe on his
face. "I'm sure it is -- try it on."

    Harry threw the cloak around his shoulders and Ron gave a yell.

    "It is! Look down!"

    Harry looked down at his feet, but they were gone. He dashed to
the mirror. Sure enough, his reflection looked back at him, just his
head suspended in midair, his body completely invisible. He pulled
the cloak over his head and his reflection vanished completely.

    "There's a note!" said Ron suddenly. "A note fell out of it!"

    Harry pulled off the cloak and seized the letter. Written in
narrow, loopy writing he had never seen before were the following
words: Your father left this in my possession before he died. It
is time it was returned to you. Use it well.

    A Very Merry Christmas to you.

    There was no signature. Harry stared at the note. Ron was
admiring the cloak.

    "I'd give anything for one of these," he said. "Anything. What's
the matter?"

    "Nothing," said Harry. He felt very strange. Who had sent the
cloak? Had it really once belonged to his father?

    Before he could say or think anything else, the dormitory door
was flung open and Fred and George Weasley bounded in. Harry stuffed
the cloak quickly out of sight. He didn't feel like sharing it with
anyone else yet.

    "Merry Christmas!"

    "Hey, look -- Harry's got a Weasley sweater, too!"

    Fred and George were wearing blue sweaters, one with a large
yellow F on it, the other a G.

    "Harry's is better than ours, though," said Fred, holding up
Harry's sweater. "She obviously makes more of an effort if you're
not family."

    "Why aren't you wearing yours, Ron?" George demanded. "Come on,
get it on, they're lovely and warm."

    "I hate maroon," Ron moaned halfheartedly as he pulled it over
his head.

    "You haven't got a letter on yours," George observed. "I suppose
she thinks you don't forget your name. But we're not stupid --
we know we're called Gred and Forge."

    "What's all th is noise.

    Percy Weasley stuck his head through the door, looking
disapproving. He had clearly gotten halfway through unwrapping his
presents as he, too, carried a lumpy sweater over his arm, which

    Fred seized.

    "P for prefect! Get it on, Percy, come on, we're all wearing
ours, even Harry got one."

    "I -- don't -- want said Percy thickly, as the twins forced
the sweater over his head, knocking his glasses askew.

    "And you're not sitting with the prefects today, either," said

    George. "Christmas is a time for family."

    They frog-marched Percy from the room, his arms pinned to his
side by his sweater.

    Harry had never in all his life had such a Christmas dinner. A
hundred fat, roast turkeys; mountains of roast and boiled potatoes;
platters of chipolatas; tureens of buttered peas, silver boats
of thick, rich gravy and cranberry sauce -- and stacks of wizard
crackers every few feet along the table. These fantastic party
favors were nothing like the feeble Muggle ones the Dursleys usually
bought, with their little plastic toys and their flimsy paper hats
inside. Harry pulled a wizard cracker with Fred and it didn't just
bang, it went off with a blast like a cannon and engulfed them all
in a cloud of blue smoke, while from the inside exploded a rear
admiral's hat and several live, white mice. Up at the High Table,
Dumbledore had swapped his pointed wizard's hat for a flowered
bonnet, and was chuckling merrily at a joke Professor Flitwick had
just read him.

    Flaming Christmas puddings followed the turkey. Percy nearly
broke his teeth on a silver sickle embedded in his slice. Harry
watched Hagrid getting redder and redder in the face as he called
for more wine, finally kissing Professor McGonagall on the cheek,
who, to Harry's amazement, giggled and blushed, her top hat lopsided.

    When Harry finally left the table, he was laden down with a stack
of things out of the crackers, including a pack of nonexplodable,
luminous balloons, a Grow-Your-Own-Warts kit, and his own new wizard
chess set. The white mice had disappeared and Harry had a nasty
feeling they were going to end up as Mrs. Norris's Christmas dinner.

    Harry and the Weasleys spent a happy afternoon having a furious
snowball fight on the grounds. Then, cold, wet, and gasping for
breath, they returned to the fire in the Gryffindor common room,
where Harry broke in his new chess set by losing spectacularly to
Ron. He suspected he wouldn't have lost so badly if Percy hadn't
tried to help him so much.

    After a meal of turkey sandwiches, crumpets, trifle, and
Christmas cake, everyone felt too full and sleepy to do much
before bed except sit and watch Percy chase Fred and George all
over Gryffindor tower because they'd stolen his prefect badge.

    It had been Harry's best Christmas day ever. Yet something had
been nagging at the back of his mind all day. Not until he climbed
into bed was he free to think about it: the invisibility cloak and
whoever had sent it.

    Ron, full of turkey and cake and with nothing mysterious to
bother him, fell asleep almost as soon as he'd drawn the curtains
of his four-poster. Harry leaned over the side of his own bed and
pulled the cloak out from under it.

    His father's... this had been his father's. He let the material
flow over his hands, smoother than silk, light as air. Use it well,
the note had said.

    He had to try it, now. He slipped out of bed and wrapped the
cloak around himself. Looking down at his legs, he saw only moonlight
and shadows. It was a very funny feeling.

    Use it well.

    Suddenly, Harry felt wide-awake. The whole of Hogwarts was
open to him in this cloak. Excitement flooded through him as he
stood there in the dark and silence. He could go anywhere in this,
anywhere, and Filch would never know.

    Ron grunted in his sleep. Should Harry wake him? Something
held him back -- his father's cloak -- he felt that this time --
the first time -- he wanted to use it alone.

    He crept out of the dormitory, down the stairs, across the
common room, and climbed through the portrait hole.

    "Who's there?" squawked the Fat Lady. Harry said nothing. He
walked quickly down the corridor.

    Where should he go? He stopped, his heart racing, and
thought. And then it came to him. The Restricted Section in the
library. He'd be able to read as long as he liked, as long as it
took to find out who Flamel was. He set off, drawing the invisibility
cloak tight around him as he walked.

    The library was pitch-black and very eerie. Harry lit a lamp
to see his way along the rows of books. The lamp looked as if it
was floating along in midair, and even though Harry could feel his
arm supporting it, the sight gave him the creeps.

    The Restricted Section was right at the back of the library. Step
ping carefully over the rope that separated these books from the
rest of the library, he held up his lamp to read the titles.

    They didn't tell him much. Their peeling, faded gold letters
spelled words in languages Harry couldn't understand. Some had no
title at all. One book had a dark stain on it that looked horribly
like blood. The hairs on the back of Harry's neck prickled. Maybe
he was imagining it, maybe not, but he thought a faint whispering
was coming from the books, as though they knew someone was there
who shouldn't be.

    He had to start somewhere. Setting the lamp down carefully on the
floor, he looked along the bottom shelf for an interestinglooking
book. A large black and silver volume caught his eye. He pulled it
out with difficulty, because it was very heavy, and, balancing it
on his knee, let it fall open.

    A piercing, bloodcurdling shriek split the silence -- the book
was screaming! Harry snapped it shut, but the shriek went on and
on, one high, unbroken, earsplitting note. He stumbled backward
and knocked over his lamp, which went out at once. Panicking, he
heard footsteps coming down the corridor outside -- stuffing the
shrieking book back on the shelf, he ran for it. He passed Filch in
the doorway; Filch's pale, wild eyes looked straight through him,
and Harry slipped under Filch's outstretched arm and streaked off
up the corridor, the book's shrieks still ringing in his ears.

    He came to a sudden halt in front of a tall suit of armor. He
had been so busy getting away from the library, he hadn't paid
attention to where he was going. Perhaps because it was dark, he
didn't recognize where he was at all. There was a suit of armor
near the kitchens, he knew, but he must be five floors above there.

    "You asked me to come directly to you, Professor, if anyone
was wandering around at night, and somebody's been in the library
Restricted Section."

    Harry felt the blood drain out of his face. Wherever he was,
Filch must know a shortcut, because his soft, greasy voice was
getting nearer, and to his horror, it was Snape who replied,
"The Restricted Section? Well, they can't be far, we'll catch them."

    Harry stood rooted to the spot as Filch and Snape came around
the corner ahead. They couldn't see him, of course, but it was a
narrow corridor and if they came much nearer they'd knock right
into him -- the cloak didn't stop him from being solid.

    He backed away as quietly as he could. A door stood ajar to
his left. It was his only hope. He squeezed through it, holding
his breath, trying not to move it, and to his relief he managed to
get inside the room without their noticing anything. They walked
straight past, and Harry leaned against the wall, breathing deeply,
listening to their footsteps dying away. That had been close, very
close. It was a few seconds before he noticed anything about the
room he had hidden in.

    It looked like an unused classroom. The dark shapes of desks
and chairs were piled against the walls, and there was an upturned
wastepaper basket -- but propped against the wall facing him was
something that didn't look as if it belonged there, something that
looked as if someone had just put it there to keep it out of the way.

    It was a magnificent mirror, as high as the ceiling, with
an ornate gold frame, standing on two clawed feet. There was an
inscription carved around the top: Erised stra ehru oyt ube cafru
oyt on wohsi. His panic fading now that there was no sound of Filch
and Snape, Harry moved nearer to the mirror, wanting to look at
himself but see no reflection again. He stepped in front of it.

    He had to clap his hands to his mouth to stop himself from
screaming. He whirled around. His heart was pounding far more
furiously than when the book had screamed -- for he had seen not
only himself in the mirror, but a whole crowd of people standing
right behind him.

    But the room was empty. Breathing very fast, he turned slowly
back to the mirror.

    There he was, reflected in it, white and scared-looking, and
there, reflected behind him, were at least ten others. Harry looked
over his shoulder -- but still, no one was there. Or were they all
invisible, too? Was he in fact in a room full of invisible people
and this mirror's trick was that it reflected them, invisible or not?

    He looked in the mirror again. A woman standing right behind his
reflection was smiling at him and waving. He reached out a hand and
felt the air behind him. If she was really there, he'd touch her,
their reflections were so close together, but he felt only air --
she and the others existed only in the mirror.

    She was a very pretty woman. She had dark red hair and her eyes
-- her eyes are just like mine, Harry thought, edging a little
closer to the glass. Bright green -- exactly the same shape,
but then he noticed that she was crying; smiling, but crying at
the same time. The tall, thin, black-haired man standing next to
her put his arm around her. He wore glasses, and his hair was very
untidy. It stuck up at the back, just as Harry's did.

    Harry was so close to the mirror now that his nose was nearly
touching that of his reflection.

    "Mom?" he whispered. "Dad?"

    They just looked at him, smiling. And slowly, Harry looked
into the faces of the other people in the mirror, and saw other
pairs of green eyes like his, other noses like his, even a little
old man who looked as though he had Harry's knobbly knees -- Harry
was looking at his family, for the first time in his life.

    The Potters smiled and waved at Harry and he stared hungrily
back at them, his hands pressed flat against the glass as though
he was hoping to fall right through it and reach them. He had a
powerful kind of ache inside him, half joy, half terrible sadness.

    How long he stood there, he didn't know. The reflections did not
fade and he looked and looked until a distant noise brought him back
to his senses. He couldn't stay here, he had to find his way back
to bed. He tore his eyes away from his mother's face, whispered,
"I'll come back," and hurried from the room.

    "You could have woken me up," said Ron, crossly.

    "You can come tonight, I'm going back, I want to show you
the mirror.

    "I'd like to see your mom and dad," Ron said eagerly.

    "And I want to see all your family, all the Weasleys, you'll
be able to show me your other brothers and everyone."

    "You can see them any old time," said Ron. "Just come round my
house this summer. Anyway, maybe it only shows dead people. Shame
about not finding Flamel, though. Have some bacon or something,
why aren't you eating anything?"

    Harry couldn't eat. He had seen his parents and would be seeing
them again tonight. He had almost forgotten about Flamel. It didn't
seem very important anymore. Who cared what the three headed dog
was guarding? What did it matter if Snape stole it, really?

    "Are you all right?" said Ron. "You look odd."

    What Harry feared most was that he might not be able to find the
mirror room again. With Ron covered in the cloak, too, they had to
walk much more slowly the next night. They tried retracing Harry's
route from the library, wandering around the dark passageways for
nearly an hour.

    "I'm freezing," said Ron. "Let's forget it and go back."

    "No!" Harry hissed. I know it's here somewhere."

    They passed the ghost of a tall witch gliding in the opposite
direction, but saw no one else. just as Ron started moaning that
his feet were dead with cold, Harry spotted the suit of armor.

    "It's here -- just here -- yes!"

    They pushed the door open. Harry dropped the cloak from around
his shoulders and ran to the mirror.

    There they were. His mother and father beamed at the sight
of him.

    "See?" Harry whispered.

    "I can't see anything."

    "Look! Look at them all... there are loads of them...."

    "I can only see you."

    "Look in it properly, go on, stand where I am."

    Harry stepped aside, but with Ron in front of the mirror,
he couldn't see his family anymore, just Ron in his paisley pajamas.

    Ron, though, was staring transfixed at his image.

    "Look at me!" he said.

    "Can you see all your family standing around you?"

    "No -- I'm alone -- but I'm different -- I look older -- and
I'm head boy!"

    "What?"

    "I am -- I'm wearing the badge like Bill used to -- and I'm
holding the house cup and the Quidditch cup -- I'm Quidditch
captain, too.

    Ron tore his eyes away from this splendid sight to look excitedly
at Harry.

    "Do you think this mirror shows the future?"

    "How can it? All my family are dead -- let me have another
look --"

    "You had it to yourself all last night, give me a bit more time."

    "You're only holding the Quidditch cup, what's interesting
about that? I want to see my parents."

    "Don't push me --"

    A sudden noise outside in the corridor put an end to their
discussion. They hadn't realized how loudly they had been talking.

    "Quick!"

    Ron threw the cloak back over them as the luminous eyes of
Mrs. Norris came round the door. Ron and Harry stood quite still,
both thinking the same thing -- did the cloak work on cats? After
what seemed an age, she turned and left.

    "This isn't safe -- she might have gone for Filch, I bet she
heard us. Come on."

    And Ron pulled Harry out of the room.

    The snow still hadn't melted the next morning.

    "Want to play chess, Harry?" said Ron.

    "No."

    "Why don't we go down and visit Hagrid?"

    "No... you go..."

    "I know what you're thinking about, Harry, that mirror. Don't
go back tonight."

    "Why not?"

    "I dunno, I've just got a bad feeling about it -- and
anyway, you've had too many close shaves already. Filch, Snape,
and Mrs. Norris are wandering around. So what if they can't see
you? What if they walk into you? What if you knock something over?"

    "You sound like Hermione."

    "I'm serious, Harry, don't go."

    But Harry only had one thought in his head, which was to get
back in front of the mirror, and Ron wasn't going to stop him.

    That third night he found his way more quickly than before. He
was walking so fast he knew he was making more noise than was wise,
but he didn't meet anyone.

    And there were his mother and father smiling at him again,
and one of his grandfathers nodding happily. Harry sank down to sit
on the floor in front of the mirror. There was nothing to stop him
from staying here all night with his family. Nothing at all.

    Except --

    "So -- back again, Harry?"

    Harry felt as though his insides had turned to ice. He looked
behind him. Sitting on one of the desks by the wall was none other
than Albus Dumbledore. Harry must have walked straight past him,
so desperate to get to the mirror he hadn't noticed him.

    " -- I didn't see you, sir."

    "Strange how nearsighted being invisible can make you," said
Dumbledore, and Harry was relieved to see that he was smiling.

    "So," said Dumbledore, slipping off the desk to sit on the
floor with Harry, "you, like hundreds before you, have discovered
the delights of the Mirror of Erised."

    "I didn't know it was called that, Sir."

    "But I expect you've realized by now what it does?"

    "It -- well -- it shows me my family --"

    "And it showed your friend Ron himself as head boy."

    "How did you know --?"

    "I don't need a cloak to become invisible," said Dumbledore
gently. "Now, can you think what the Mirror of Erised shows us all?"

    Harry shook his head.

    "Let me explain. The happiest man on earth would be able to
use the Mirror of Erised like a normal mirror, that is, he would
look into it and see himself exactly as he is. Does that help?"

    Harry thought. Then he said slowly, "It shows us what we
want... whatever we want..."

    "Yes and no," said Dumbledore quietly. "It shows us nothing
more or less than the deepest, most desperate desire of our
hearts. You, who have never known your family, see them standing
around you. Ronald Weasley, who has always been overshadowed
by his brothers, sees himself standing alone, the best of all
of them. However, this mirror will give us neither knowledge or
truth. Men have wasted away before it, entranced by what they have
seen, or been driven mad, not knowing if what it shows is real or
even possible.

    "The Mirror will be moved to a new home tomorrow, Harry, and I
ask you not to go looking for it again. If you ever do run across
it, you will now be prepared. It does not do to dwell on dreams
and forget to live, remember that. Now, why don't you put that
admirable cloak back on and get off to bed?"

    Harry stood up.

    "Sir -- Professor Dumbledore? Can I ask you something?"

    "Obviously, you've just done so," Dumbledore smiled. "You may
ask me one more thing, however."

    "What do you see when you look in the mirror?"

    "I? I see myself holding a pair of thick, woolen socks."

    Harry stared.

    "One can never have enough socks," said Dumbledore. "Another
Christmas has come and gone and I didn't get a single pair. People
will insist on giving me books."

    It was only when he was back in bed that it struck Harry that
Dumbledore might not have been quite truthful. But then, he thought,
as he shoved Scabbers off his pillow, it had been quite a personal
question.

    CHAPTER THIRTEEN

    NICOLAS FLAMEL

    Dumbledore had convinced Harry not to go looking for the Mirror
of Erised again, and for the rest of the Christmas holidays the
invisibility cloak stayed folded at the bottom of his trunk. Harry
wished he could forget what he'd seen in the mirror as easily, but
he couldn't. He started having nightmares. Over and over again he
dreamed about his parents disappearing in a flash of green light,
while a high voice cackled with laughter.

    "You see, Dumbledore was right, that mirror could drive you mad,"
said Ron, when Harry told him about these drearns.

    Hermione, who came back the day before term started, took a
different view of things. She was torn between horror at the idea
of Harry being out of bed, roaming the school three nights in a row
("If Filch had caught you!"), and disappointment that he hadn't at
least found out who Nicolas Flamel was.

    They had almost given up hope of ever finding Flamel in a li-
brary book, even though Harry was still sure he'd read the name
somewhere. Once term had started, they were back to skimming through
books for ten minutes during their breaks. Harry had even less time
than the other two, because Quidditch practice had started again.

    Wood was working the team harder than ever. Even the endless
rain that had replaced the snow couldn't dampen his spirits. The
Weasleys complained that Wood was becoming a fanatic, but Harry was
on Wood's side. If they won their next match, against Hufflepuff,
they would overtake Slytherin in the house championship for the first
time in seven years. Quite apart from wanting to win, Harry found
that he had fewer nightmares when he was tired out after training.

    Then, during one particularly wet and muddy practice session,
Wood gave the team a bit of bad news. He'd just gotten very angry
with the Weasleys, who kept dive-bombing each other and pretending
to fall off their brooms.

    "Will you stop messing around!" he yelled. "That's exactly
the sort of thing that'll lose us the match! Snape's refereeing
this time, and he'll be looking for any excuse to knock points
off Gryffindor!"

    George Weasley really did fall off his broom at these words.

    "Snape's refereeing?" he spluttered through a mouthful of
mud. "When's he ever refereed a Quidditch match? He's not going to
be fair if we might overtake Slytherin."

    The rest of the team landed next to George to complain, too.

    "It's not my fault," said Wood. "We've just got to make sure
we play a clean game, so Snape hasn't got an excuse to pick on us."

    Which was all very well, thought Harry, but he had another reason
for not wanting Snape near him while he was playing Quidditch....

    The rest of the team hung back to talk to one another as usual
at the end of practice, but Harry headed straight back to the
Gryffindor common room, where he found Ron and Hermione playing
chess. Chess was the only thing Hermione ever lost at, something
Harry and Ron thought was very good for her.

    "Don't talk to me for a moment," said Ron when Harry sat down
next to him, "I need to concen --" He caught sight of Harry's
face. "What's the matter with you? You look terrible."

    Speaking quietly so that no one else would hear, Harry told the
other two about Snape's sudden, sinister desire to be a Quidditch
referee.

    "Don't play," said Hermione at once.

    "Say you're ill," said Ron.

    "Pretend to break your leg," Hermione suggested.

    "Really break your leg," said Ron.

    "I can't," said Harry. "There isn't a reserve Seeker. If I back
out, Gryffindor can't play at all."

    At that moment Neville toppled into the common room. How he
had managed to climb through the portrait hole was anyone's guess,
because his legs had been stuck together with what they recognized
at once as the Leg-Locker Curse. He must have had to bunny hop all
the way up to Gryffindor tower.

    Everyone fell over laughing except Hermione, who leapt up and
performed the countercurse. Neville's legs sprang apart and he
got to his feet, trembling. "What happened?" Hermione asked him,
leading him over to sit with Harry and Ron.

    "Malfoy," said Neville shakily. "I met him outside the
library. He said he'd been looking for someone to practice that on."

    "Go to Professor McGonagall!" Hermione urged Neville. "Report
him!"

    Neville shook his head.

    "I don't want more trouble," he mumbled.

    "You've got to stand up to him, Neville!" said Ron. "He's used
to walking all over people, but that's no reason to lie down in
front of him and make it easier."

    "There's no need to tell me I'm not brave enough to be in
Gryffindor, Malfoy's already done that," Neville choked out.

    Harry felt in the pocket of his robes and pulled out a Chocolate
Frog, the very last one from the box Hermione had given him for
Christmas. He gave it to Neville, who looked as though he might cry.

    "You're worth twelve of Malfoy," Harry said. "The Sorting
Hat chose you for Gryffindor, didn't it? And where's Malfoy? In
stinking Slytherin."

    Neville's lips twitched in a weak smile as he unwrapped the frog.

    "Thanks, Harry... I think I'll go to bed.... D'you want the card,
you collect them, don't you?"

    As Neville walked away, Harry looked at the Famous Wizard card.

    "Dumbledore again," he said, "He was the first one I ever-"

    He gasped. He stared at the back of the card. Then he looked
up at Ron and Hermione.

    "I've found him!" he whispered. "I've found Flamel! I told you
I'd read the name somewhere before, I read it on the train coming
here -- listen to this: 'Dumbledore is particularly famous for his
defeat of the dark wizard Grindelwald in 1945, for the discovery
of the twelve uses of dragon's blood, and his work on alchemy with
his partner, Nicolas Flamel'!"

    Hermione jumped to her feet. She hadn't looked so excited since
they'd gotten back the marks for their very first piece of homework.

    "Stay there!" she said, and she sprinted up the stairs to
the girls' dormitories. Harry and Ron barely had time to exchange
mystified looks before she was dashing back, an enormous old book
in her arms.

    "I never thought to look in here!" she whispered excitedly. "I
got this out of the library weeks ago for a bit of light reading."

    "Light?" said Ron, but Hermione told him to be quiet until she'd
looked something up, and started flicking frantically through the
pages, muttering to herself.

    At last she found what she was looking for.

    "I knew it! I knew it!"

    "Are we allowed to speak yet?" said Ron grumpily. Hermione
ignored him.

    "Nicolas Flamel," she whispered dramatically, "is the only
known maker of the Sorcerer's Stone!"

    This didn't have quite the effect she'd expected.

    "The what?" said Harry and Ron.

    "Oh, honestly, don't you two read? Look -- read that, there."

    She pushed the book toward them, and Harry and Ron read: The
ancient study of alchemy is concerned with making the Sorcerer's
Stone, a legendary substance with astonishing powers. The stone will
transform any metal into pure gold. It also produces the Elixir of
Life, which will make the drinker immortal.

    There have been many reports of the Sorcerer's Stone over the
centuries, but the only Stone currently in existence belongs to
Mr. Nicolas Flamel, the noted alchemist and opera lover. Mr. Flamel,
who celebrated his six hundred and sixty-fifth birthday last year,
enjoys a quiet life in Devon with his wife, Perenelle (six hundred
and fifty-eight).

    "See?" said Hermione, when Harry and Ron had finished. "The dog
must be guarding Flamel's Sorcerer's Stone! I bet he asked Dumbledore
to keep it safe for him, because they're friends and he knew someone
was after it, that's why he wanted the Stone moved out of Gringotts!"

    "A stone that makes gold and stops you from ever dying!" said
Harry. "No wonder Snape's after it! Anyone would want it."

    "And no wonder we couldn't find Flamel in that Study of Recent
Developments in Wizardry," said Ron. "He's not exactly recent if
he's six hundred and sixty-five, is he?"

    The next morning in Defense Against the Dark Arts, while copying
down different ways of treating werewolf bites, Harry and Ron were
still discussing what they'd do with a Sorcerer's Stone if they had
one. It wasn't until Ron said he'd buy his own Quidditch team that
Harry remembered about Snape and the coming match.

    "I'm going to play," he told Ron and Hermione. "If I don't, all
the Slytherins will think I'm just too scared to face Snape. I'll
show them... it'll really wipe the smiles off their faces if we win."

    "Just as long as we're not wiping you off the field," said
Hermione.

    As the match drew nearer, however, Harry became more and more
nervous, whatever he told Ron and Hermione. The rest of the team
wasn't too calm, either. The idea of overtaking Slytherin in the
house championship was wonderful, no one had done it for seven years,
but would they be allowed to, with such a biased referee?

    Harry didn't know whether he was imagining it or not, but
he seemed to keep running into Snape wherever he went. At times,
he even wondered whether Snape was following him, trying to catch
him on his own. Potions lessons were turning into a sort of weekly
torture, Snape was so horrible to Harry. Could Snape possibly know
they'd found out about the Sorcerer's Stone? Harry didn't see how
he could -- yet he sometimes had the horrible feeling that Snape
could read minds.

    Harry knew, when they wished him good luck outside the locker
rooms the next afternoon, that Ron and Hermione were wondering
whether they'd ever see him alive again. This wasn't what you'd
call comforting. Harry hardly heard a word of Wood's pep talk as he
pulled on his Quidditch robes and picked up his Nimbus Two Thousand.

    Ron and Hermione, meanwhile, had found a place in the stands
next to Neville, who couldn't understand why they looked so
grim and worried, or why they had both brought their wands to the
match. Little did Harry know that Ron and Hermione had been secretly
practicing the Leg-Locker Curse. They'd gotten the idea from Malfoy
using it on Neville, and were ready to use it on Snape if he showed
any sign of wanting to hurt Harry.

    "Now, don't forget, it's Locomotor Mortis," Hermione muttered
as Ron slipped his wand up his sleeve.

    "I know," Ron snapped. "Don't nag."

    Back in the locker room, Wood had taken Harry aside.

    "Don't want to pressure you, Potter, but if we ever need an
early capture of the Snitch it's now. Finish the game before Snape
can favor Hufflepuff too much."

    "The whole school's out there!" said Fred Weasley, peering out
of the door. "Even -- blimey -- Dumbledore's come to watch!"

    Harry's heart did a somersault.

    "Dumbledore?" he said, dashing to the door to make sure. Fred
was right. There was no mistaking that silver beard.

    Harry could have laughed out loud with relief He was safe. There
was simply no way that Snape would dare to try to hurt him if
Dumbledore was watching.

    Perhaps that was why Snape was looking so angry as the teams
marched onto the field, something that Ron noticed, too.

    "I've never seen Snape look so mean," he told Hermione. "Look
-they're off Ouch!"

    Someone had poked Ron in the back of the head. It was Malfoy.

    "Oh, sorry, Weasley, didn't see you there."

    Malfoy grinned broadly at Crabbe and Goyle.

    "Wonder how long Potter's going to stay on his broom this
time? Anyone want a bet? What about you, Weasley?"

    Ron didn't answer; Snape had just awarded Hufflepuff a penalty
because George Weasley had hit a Bludger at him. Hermione, who had
all her fingers crossed in her lap, was squinting fixedly at Harry,
who was circling the game like a hawk, looking for the Snitch.

    "You know how I think they choose people for the Gryffindor
team?" said Malfoy loudly a few minutes later, as Snape awarded
Hufflepuff another penalty for no reason at all. "It's people
they feel sorry for. See, there's Potter, who's got no parents,
then there's the Weasleys, who've got no money -- you should be on
the team, Longbottom, you've got no brains."

    Neville went bright red but turned in his seat to face Malfoy.

    "I'm worth twelve of you, Malfoy," he stammered.

    Malfoy, Crabbe, and Goyle howled with laughter, but Ron, still
not daring to take his eyes from the game, said, "You tell him,
Neville."

    "Longbottom, if brains were gold you'd be poorer than Weasley,
and that's saying something."

    Ron's nerves were already stretched to the breaking point with
anxiety about Harry.

    "I'm warning you, Malfoy -- one more word

    "Ron!" said Hermione suddenly, "Harry --"

    "What? Where?"

    Harry had suddenly gone into a spectacular dive, which drew gasps
and cheers from the crowd. Hermione stood up, her crossed fingers
in her mouth, as Harry streaked toward the ground like a bullet.

    "You're in luck, Weasley, Potter's obviously spotted some money
on the ground!" said Malfoy.

    Ron snapped. Before Malfoy knew what was happening, Ron was
on top of him, wrestling him to the ground. Neville hesitated,
then clambered over the back of his seat to help.

    "Come on, Harry!" Hermione screamed, leaping onto her seat to
watch as Harry sped straight at Snape -- she didn't even notice
Malfoy and Ron rolling around under her seat, or the scuffles and
yelps coming from the whirl of fists that was Neville, Crabbe,
and Goyle.

    Up in the air, Snape turned on his broomstick just in time
to see something scarlet shoot past him, missing him by inches --
the next second, Harry had pulled out of the dive, his arm raised
in triumph, the Snitch clasped in his hand.

    The stands erupted; it had to be a record, no one could ever
remember the Snitch being caught so quickly.

    "Ron! Ron! Where are you? The game's over! Harry's won! We've
won! Gryffindor is in the lead!" shrieked Hermione, dancing up and
down on her seat and hugging Parvati Patil in the row in front.

    Harry jumped off his broom, a foot from the ground. He couldn't
believe it. He'd done it -- the game was over; it had barely lasted
five minutes. As Gryffindors came spilling onto the field, he saw
Snape land nearby, white-faced and tight-lipped -- then Harry felt
a hand on his shoulder and looked up into Dumbledore's smiling face.

    "Well done," said Dumbledore quietly, so that only Harry
could hear. "Nice to see you haven't been brooding about that
mirror... been keeping busy... excellent..."

    Snape spat bitterly on the ground.

    Harry left the locker room alone some time later, to take his
Nimbus Two Thousand back to the broomshed. He couldn't ever remember
feeling happier. He'd really done something to be proud of now -- no
one could say he was just a famous name any more. The evening air had
never smelled so sweet. He walked over the damp grass, reliving the
last hour in his head, which was a happy blur: Gryffindors running
to lift him onto their shoulders; Ron and Hermione in the distance,
jumping up and down, Ron cheering through a heavy nosebleed.

    Harry had reached the shed. He leaned against the wooden door and
looked up at Hogwarts, with its windows glowing red in the setting
sun. Gryffindor in the lead. He'd done it, he'd shown Snape....

    And speaking of Snape...

    A hooded figure came swiftly down the front steps of the
castle. Clearly not wanting to be seen, it walked as fast as possible
toward the forbidden forest. Harry's victory faded from his mind
as he watched. He recognized the figure's prowling walk. Snape,
sneaking into the forest while everyone else was at dinner --
what was going on?

    Harry jumped back on his Nimbus Two Thousand and took
off. Gliding silently over the castle he saw Snape enter the forest
at a run. He followed.

    The trees were so thick he couldn't see where Snape had gone. He
flew in circles, lower and lower, brushing the top branches of trees
until he heard voices. He glided toward them and landed noiselessly
in a towering beech tree.

    He climbed carefully along one of the branches, holding tight
to his broomstick, trying to see through the leaves. Below, in a
shadowy clearing, stood Snape, but he wasn't alone. Quirrell was
there, too. Harry couldn't make out the look on his face, but he
was stuttering worse than ever. Harry strained to catch what they
were saying.

    "... d-don't know why you wanted t-t-to meet here of all
p-places, Severus..."

    "Oh, I thought we'd keep this private," said Snape, his voice
icy. "Students aren't supposed to know about the Sorcerer's Stone,
after all."

    Harry leaned forward. Quirrell was mumbling something. Snape
interrupted him.

    "Have you found out how to get past that beast of Hagrid's yet?"

    "B-b-but Severus, I --"

    "You don't want me as your enemy, Quirrell," said Snape, taking
a step toward him.

    "I-I don't know what you

    "You know perfectly well what I mean."

    An owl hooted loudly, and Harry nearly fell out of the tree. He
steadied himself in time to hear Snape say, "-- your little bit of
hocus-pocus. I'm waiting."

    "B-but I d-d-don't --"

    "Very well," Snape cut in. "We'll have another little chat soon,
when you've had time to think things over and decided where your
loyalties lie."

    He threw his cloak over his head and strode out of the
clearing. It was almost dark now, but Harry could see Quirrell,
standing quite still as though he was petrified.

    "Harry, where have you been?" Hermione squeaked.

    "We won! You won! We won!" shouted Ron, thumping Harry on the
back. "And I gave Malfoy a black eye, and Neville tried to take on
Crabbe and Goyle single-handed! He's still out cold but Madam Pomftey
says he'll be all right - talk about showing Slytherin! Everyone's
waiting for you in the common room, we're having a party, Fred and
George stole some cakes and stuff from the kitchens."

    "Never mind that now," said Harry breathlessly. "Let's find an
empty room, you wait 'til you hear this...."

    He made sure Peeves wasn't inside before shutting the door
behind them, then he told them what he'd seen and heard.

    "So we were right, it is the Sorcerer's Stone, and Snape's trying
to force Quirrell to help him get it. He asked if he knew how to get
past Fluffy - and he said something about Quirrell's 'hocus pocuss--
I reckon there are other things guarding the stone apart from Fluffy,
loads of enchantments, probably, and Quirrell would have done some
anti-Dark Arts spell that Snape needs to break through --"

    "So you mean the Stone's only safe as long as Quirrell stands
up to Snape?" said Hermione in alarm.

    "It'll be gone by next Tuesday," said Ron.

    CHAPTER FOURTEEN

    NORBERT THE NORWEGIAN RIDGEBACK

    Quirrell, however, must have been braver than they'd thought. In
the weeks that followed he did seem to be getting paler and thinner,
but it didn't look as though he'd cracked yet.

    Every time they passed the third-floor corridor, Harry, Ron,
and Hermione would press their ears to the door to check that Fluffy
was still growling inside. Snape was sweeping about in his usual bad
temper, which surely meant that the Stone was still safe. Whenever
Harry passed Quirrell these days he gave him an encouraging sort
of smile, and Ron had started telling people off for laughing at
Quirrell's stutter.

    Hermione, however, had more on her mind than the Sorcerer's
Stone. She had started drawing up study schedules and colorcoding
all her notes. Harry and Ron wouldn't have minded, but she kept
nagging them to do the same.

    "Hermione, the exams are ages away."

    "Ten weeks," Hermione snapped. "That's not ages, that's like
a second to Nicolas Flamel."

    "But we're not six hundred years old," Ron reminded her. "Anyway,
what are you studying for, you already know it A."

    "What am I studying for? Are you crazy? You realize we need to
pass these exams to get into the second year? They're very important,
I should have started studying a month ago, I don't know what's
gotten into me...."

    Unfortunately, the teachers seemed to be thinking along the
same lines as Hermione. They piled so much homework on them that the
Easter holidays weren't nearly as much fun as the Christmas ones. It
was hard to relax with Hermione next to you reciting the twelve uses
of dragon's blood or practicing wand movements. Moaning and yawning,
Harry and Ron spent most of their free time in the library with her,
trying to get through all their extra work.

    "I'll never remember this," Ron burst out one afternoon, throwing
down his quill and looking longingly out of the library window. It
was the first really fine day they'd had in months. The sky was a
clear, forget-me-not blue, and there was a feeling in the air of
summer coming.

    Harry, who was looking up "Dittany" in One Thousand Magical
Herbs and Fungi, didn't look up until he heard Ron say, "Hagrid! What
are you doing in the library?"

    Hagrid shuffled into view, hiding something behind his back. He
looked very out of place in his moleskin overcoat.

    "Jus' lookin'," he said, in a shifty voice that got their
interest at once. "An' what're you lot up ter?" He looked suddenly
suspicious. "Yer not still lookin' fer Nicolas Flamel, are yeh?" "Oh,
we found out who he is ages ago," said Ron impressively. "And we
know what that dog's guarding, it's a Sorcerer's St --"

    "Shhhh!" Hagrid looked around quickly to see if anyone was
listening. "Don' go shoutin' about it, what's the matter with yeh?"

    "There are a few things we wanted to ask you, as a matter of
fact," said Harry, "about what's guarding the Stone apart from
Fluffy --"

    "SHHHH!" said Hagrid again. "Listen - come an' see me later, I'm
not promisin' I'll tell yeh anythin', mind, but don' go rabbitin'
about it in here, students aren' s'pposed ter know. They'll think
I've told yeh --"

    "See you later, then," said Harry.

    Hagrid shuffled off.

    "What was he hiding behind his back?" said Hermione thoughtfully.

    "Do you think it had anything to do with the Stone?"

    "I'm going to see what section he was in," said Ron, who'd had
enough of working. He came back a minute later with a pile of books
in his arms and slammed them down on the table.

    "Dragons!" he whispered. "Hagrid was looking up stuff about
dragons! Look at these: Dragon Species of Great Britain and Ireland;
From Egg to Inferno, A Dragon Keeper's Guide."

    "Hagrid's always wanted a dragon, he told me so the first time
I ever met him, " said Harry.

    "But it's against our laws," said Ron. "Dragon breeding was
outlawed by the Warlocks' Convention of 1709, everyone knows
that. It's hard to stop Muggles from noticing us if we're keeping
dragons in the back garden - anyway, you can't tame dragons, it's
dangerous. You should see the burns Charlie's got off wild ones
in Romania."

    "But there aren't wild dragons in Britain?" said Harry.

    "Of course there are," said Ron. "Common Welsh Green and
Hebridean Blacks. The Ministry of Magic has a job hushing them up,
I can tell you. Our kind have to keep putting spells on Muggles
who've spotted them, to make them forget."

    "So what on earths Hagrid up to?" said Hermione.

    When they knocked on the door of the gamekeeper's hut an
hour later, they were surprised to see that all the curtains were
closed. Hagrid called "Who is it?" before he let them in, and then
shut the door quickly behind them.

    It was stifling hot inside. Even though it was such a warm day,
there was a blazing fire in the grate. Hagrid made them tea and
offered them stoat sandwiches, which they refused.

    "So -- yeh wanted to ask me somethin'?"

    "Yes," said Harry. There was no point beating around the
bush. "We were wondering if you could tell us what's guarding the
Sorcerer's Stone apart from Fluffy."

    Hagrid frowned at him.

    "0' course I cant, he said. "Number one, I don' know
meself. Number two, yeh know too much already, so I wouldn' tell
yeh if I could. That Stone's here fer a good reason. It Was almost
stolen outta Gringotts - I s'ppose yeh've worked that out an'
all? Beats me how yeh even know abou' Fluffy."

    "Oh, come on, Hagrid, you might not want to tell us, but you do
know, you know everything that goes on round here," said Hermione
in a warm, flattering voice. Hagrid's beard twitched and they could
tell he was smiling. "We only wondered who had done the guarding,
really." Hermione went on. "We wondered who Dumbledore had trusted
enough to help him, apart from you."

    Hagrid's chest swelled at these last words. Harry and Ron beamed
at Hermione.

    "Well, I don' s'pose it could hurt ter tell yeh that... let's
see... he borrowed Fluffy from me... then some o' the teachers
did enchantments... Professor Sprout -- Professor Flitwick --
Professor McGonagall --" he ticked them off on his fingers,
"Professor Quirrell -- an' Dumbledore himself did somethin', o'
course. Hang on, I've forgotten someone. Oh yeah, Professor Snape."

    "Snape?"

    "Yeah -- yer not still on abou' that, are yeh? Look, Snape
helped protect the Stone, he's not about ter steal it."

    Harry knew Ron and Hermione were thinking the same as he was. If
Snape had been in on protecting the Stone, it must have been easy
to find out how the other teachers had guarded it. He probably knew
everything -- except, it seemed, Quirrell's spell and how to get
past Fluffy.

    "You're the only one who knows how to get past Fluffy. aren't
you, Hagrid?" said Harry anxiously. "And you wouldn't tell anyone,
would you? Not even one of the teachers?"

    "Not a soul knows except me an' Dumbledore," said Hagrid proudly.

    "Well, that's something," Harry muttered to the others. "Hagrid,
can we have a window open? I'm boiling."

    "Can't, Harry, sorry," said Hagrid. Harry noticed him glance
at the fire. Harry looked at it, too.

    "Hagrid -- what's that?"

    But he already knew what it was. In the very heart of the fire,
underneath the kettle, was a huge, black egg.

    "Ah," said Hagrid, fiddling nervously with his beard, "That's
er..."

    "Where did you get it, Hagrid?" said Ron, crouching over the fire
to get a closer look at the egg. "It must've cost you a fortune."

    "Won it," said Hagrid. "Las' night. I was down in the
village havin' a few drinks an' got into a game o' cards with a
stranger. Think he was quite glad ter get rid of it, ter be honest."

    "But what are you going to do with it when it's hatched?" said
Hermione.

    "Well, I've bin doin' some readin' , said Hagrid, pulling a
large book from under his pillow. "Got this outta the library --
Dragon Breeding for Pleasure and Profit -- it's a bit outta date,
o' course, but it's all in here. Keep the egg in the fire, 'cause
their mothers breathe on I em, see, an' when it hatches, feed it
on a bucket o' brandy mixed with chicken blood every half hour. An'
see here -- how ter recognize diff'rent eggs -- what I got there's
a Norwegian Ridgeback. They're rare, them."

    He looked very pleased with himself, but Hermione didn't.

    "Hagrid, you live in a wooden house," she said.

    But Hagrid wasn't listening. He was humming merrily as he stoked
the fire.

    So now they had something else to worry about: what might happen
to Hagrid if anyone found out he was hiding an illegal dragon in his
hut. "Wonder what it's like to have a peaceful life," Ron sighed, as
evening after evening they struggled through all the extra homework
they were getting. Hermione had now started making study schedules
for Harry and Ron, too. It was driving them nuts.

    Then, one breakfast time, Hedwig brought Harry another note
from Hagrid. He had written only two words: It's hatching.

    Ron wanted to skip Herbology and go straight down to the
hut. Hermione wouldn't hear of it.

    "Hermione, how many times in our lives are we going to see a
dragon hatching?"

    "We've got lessons, we'll get into trouble, and that's nothing
to what Hagrid's going to be in when someone finds out what he's
doing --"

    "Shut up!" Harry whispered.

    Malfoy was only a few feet away and he had stopped dead
to listen. How much had he heard? Harry didn't like the look on
Malfoy's face at all.

    Ron and Hermione argued all the way to Herbology and in the end,
Hermione agreed to run down to Hagrid's with the other two during
morning break. When the bell sounded from the castle at the end
of their lesson, the three of them dropped their trowels at once
and hurried through the grounds to the edge of the forest. Hagrid
greeted them, looking flushed and excited.

    "It's nearly out." He ushered them inside.

    The egg was lying on the table. There were deep cracks in
it. Something was moving inside; a funny clicking noise was coming
from it.

    They all drew their chairs up to the table and watched with
bated breath.

    All at once there was a scraping noise and the egg split
open. The baby dragon flopped onto the table. It wasn't exactly
pretty; Harry thought it looked like a crumpled, black umbrella. Its
spiny wings were huge compared to its skinny jet body, it had a
long snout with wide nostrils, the stubs of horns and bulging,
orange eyes.

    It sneezed. A couple of sparks flew out of its snout.

    "Isn't he beautiful?" Hagrid murmured. He reached out a hand
to stroke the dragon's head. It snapped at his fingers, showing
pointed fangs.

    "Bless him, look, he knows his mommy!" said Hagrid.

    "Hagrid," said Hermione, "how fast do Norwegian Ridgebacks
grow, exactly?"

    Hagrid was about to answer when the color suddenly drained from
his face -- he leapt to his feet and ran to the window.

    "What's the matter?"

    "Someone was lookin' through the gap in the curtains -- it's
a kid -- he's runnin' back up ter the school."

    Harry bolted to the door and looked out. Even at a distance
there was no mistaking him.

    Malfoy had seen the dragon.

    Something about the smile lurking on Malfoy's face during the
next week made Harry, Ron, and Hermione very nervous. They spent
most of their free time in Hagrid's darkened hut, trying to reason
with him.

    "Just let him go," Harry urged. "Set him free."

    "I can't," said Hagrid. "He's too little. He'd die."

    They looked at the dragon. It had grown three times in length in
just a week. Smoke kept furling out of its nostrils. Hagrid hadn't
been doing his gamekeeping duties because the dragon was keeping
him so busy. There were empty brandy bottles and chicken feathers
all over the floor.

    "I've decided to call him Norbert," said Hagrid, looking
at the dragon with misty eyes. "He really knows me now,
watch. Norbert! Norbert! Where's Mommy?"

    "He's lost his marbles," Ron muttered in Harry's ear.

    "Hagrid," said Harry loudly, "give it two weeks and Norbert's
going to be as long as your house. Malfoy could go to Dumbledore
at any moment."

    Hagrid bit his lip.

    "I -- I know I can't keep him forever, but I can't jus' dump him,
I can't."

    Harry suddenly turned to Ron. Charlie, he said.

    "You're losing it, too," said Ron. "I'm Ron, remember?"

    "No -- Charlie -- your brother, Charlie. In Romania. Studying
dragons. We could send Norbert to him. Charlie can take care of
him and then put him back in the wild!"

    "Brilliant!" said Ron. "How about it, Hagrid?"

    And in the end, Hagrid agreed that they could send -an owl to
Charlie to ask him.

    The following week dragged by. Wednesday night found Hermione
and Harry sitting alone in the common room, long after everyone
else had gone to bed. The clock on the wall had just

    chimed midnight when the portrait hole burst open. Ron appeared
out of nowhere as he pulled off Harry's invisibility cloak. He had
been down at Hagrid's hut, helping him feed Norbert, who was now
eating dead rats by the crate.

    "It bit me!" he said, showing them his hand, which was wrapped
in a bloody handkerchief. "I'm not going to be able to hold a quill
for a week. I tell you, that dragon's the most horrible animal I've
ever met, but the way Hagrid goes on about it, you'd think it was
a fluffy little bunny rabbit. When it bit me he told me off for
frightening it. And when I left, he was singing it a lullaby."

    There was a tap on the dark window.

    "It's Hedwig!" said Harry, hurrying to let her in. "She'll have
Charlie's answer!"

    The three of them put their heads together to read the note.

    Dear Ron,

    How are you? Thanks for the letter -- I'd be glad to take the
Norwegian Ridgeback, but it won't be easy getting him here. I think
the best thing will be to send him over with some friends of mine
who are coming to visit me next week. Trouble is, they mustn't be
seen carrying an illegal dragon.

    Could you get the Ridgeback up the tallest tower at midnight
on Saturday? They can meet you there and take him away while it's
still dark.

    Send me an answer as soon as possible.

    Love,

    Charlie

    They looked at one another.

    "We've got the invisibility cloak," said Harry. "It shouldn't
be too difficult -- I think the cloaks big enough to cover two of
us and Norbert."

    It was a mark of how bad the last week had been that the other
two agreed with him. Anything to get rid of Norbert -- and Malfoy.

    There was a hitch. By the next morning, Ron's bitten hand had
swollen to twice its usual size. He didn't know whether it was safe
to go to Madam Pomfrey -- would she recognize a dragon bite? By
the afternoon, though, he had no choice. The cut had turned a nasty
shade of green. It looked as if Norbert's fangs were poisonous.

    Harry and Hermione rushed up to the hospital wing at the end
of the day to find Ron in a terrible state in bed.

    "It's not just my hand," he whispered, "although that feels
like it's about to fall off. Malfoy told Madam Pomfrey he wanted
to borrow one of my books so he could come and have a good laugh at
me. He kept threatening to tell her what really bit me -- I've told
her it was a dog, but I don't think she believes me -I shouldn't
have hit him at the Quidditch match, that's why he's doing this."

    Harry and Hermione tried to calm Ron down.

    "It'll all be over at midnight on Saturday," said Hermione,
but this didn't soothe Ron at all. On the contrary, he sat bolt
upright and broke into a sweat.

    "Midnight on Saturday!" he said in a hoarse voice. "Oh no oh
no -- I've just remembered -- Charlie's letter was in that book
Malfoy took, he's going to know we're getting rid of Norbert."

    Harry and Hermione didn't get a chance to answer. Madam Pomfrey
came over at that moment and made them leave, saying Ron needed
sleep.

    "It's too late to change the plan now," Harry told Hermione. "We
haven't got time to send Charlie another owl, and this could be
our only chance to get rid of Norbert. We'll have to risk it. And
we have got the invisibility cloak, Malfoy doesn't know about that."

    They found Fang, the boarhound, sitting outside with a bandaged
tail when they went to tell Hagrid, who opened a window to talk
to them.

    "I won't let you in," he puffed. "Norbert's at a tricky stage --
nothin' I can't handle."

    When they told him about Charlie's letter, his eyes filled with
tears, although that might have been because Norbert had just bitten
him on the leg.

    "Aargh! It's all right, he only got my boot -- jus' playin' --
he's only a baby, after all."

    The baby banged its tail on the wall, making the windows
rattle. Harry and Hermione walked back to the castle feeling Saturday
couldn't come quickly enough.

    They would have felt sorry for Hagrid when the time came for
him to say good-bye to Norbert if they hadn't been so worried
about what they had to do. It was a very dark, cloudy night, and
they were a bit late arriving at Hagrid's hut because they'd had
to wait for Peeves to get out of their way in the entrance hall,
where he'd been playing tennis against the wall. Hagrid had Norbert
packed and ready in a large crate.

    "He's got lots o' rats an' some brandy fer the journey," said
Hagrid in a muffled voice. "An' I've packed his teddy bear in case
he gets lonely."

    From inside the crate came ripping noises that sounded to Harry
as though the teddy was having his head torn off.

    "Bye-bye, Norbert!" Hagrid sobbed, as Harry and Hermione covered
the crate with the invisibility cloak and stepped underneath it
themselves. "Mommy will never forget you!"

    How they managed to get the crate back up to the castle,
they never knew. Midnight ticked nearer as they heaved Norbert
up the marble staircase in the entrance hall and along the dark
corridors. UP another staircase, then another -- even one of Harry's
shortcuts didn't make the work much easier.

    "Nearly there!" Harry panted as they reached the corridor
beneath the tallest tower.

    Then a sudden movement ahead of them made them almost drop the
crate. Forgetting that they were already invisible, they shrank into
the shadows, staring at the dark outlines of two people grappling
with each other ten feet away. A lamp flared.

    Professor McGonagall, in a tartan bathrobe and a hair net,
had Malfoy by the ear.

    "Detention!" she shouted. "And twenty points from
Slytherin! Wandering around in the middle of the night, how dare
you --"

    "You don't understand, Professor. Harry Potter's coming --
he's got a dragon!"

    "What utter rubbish! How dare you tell such lies! Come on --
I shall see Professor Snape about you, Malfoy!"

    The steep spiral staircase up to the top of the tower seemed
the easiest thing in the world after that. Not until they'd stepped
out into the cold night air did they throw off the cloak, glad to
be able to breathe properly again. Hermione did a sort of jig.

    "Malfoy's got detention! I could sing!"

    "Don't," Harry advised her.

    Chuckling about Malfoy, they waited, Norbert thrashing about in
his crate. About ten minutes later, four broomsticks came swooping
down out of the darkness.

    Charlie's friends were a cheery lot. They showed Harry and
Hermione the harness they'd rigged up, so they could suspend Norbert
between them. They all helped buckle Norbert safely into it and
then Harry and Hermione shook hands with the others and thanked
them very much.

    At last, Norbert was going... going... gone.

    They slipped back down the spiral staircase, their hearts as
light as their hands, now that Norbert was off them. No more dragon
-- Malfoy in detention -- what could spoil their happiness?

    The answer to that was waiting at the foot of the stairs. As
they stepped into the corridor, Filch's face loomed suddenly out
of the darkness.

    "Well, well, well," he whispered, "we are in trouble."

    They'd left the invisibility cloak on top of the tower.

    CHAPTER FIFTEEN

    THE FORIBIDDEN FOREST

    Things couldn't have been worse.

    Filch took them down to Professor McGonagall's study on the
first floor, where they sat and waited without saying a word to each
other. Hermione was trembling. Excuses, alibis, and wild cover- up
stories chased each other around Harry's brain, each more feeble
than the last. He couldn't see how they were going to get out of
trouble this time. They were cornered. How could they have been so
stupid as to forget the cloak? There was no reason on earth that
Professor McGonagall would accept for their being out of bed and
creeping around the school in the dead of night, let alone being
up the tallest astronomy tower, which was out-of-bounds except for
classes. Add Norbert and the invisibility cloak, and they might as
well be packing their bags already.

    Had Harry thought that things couldn't have been worse? He was
wrong. When Professor McGonagall appeared, she was leading Neville.

    "Harry!" Neville burst Out, the moment he saw the other two. "I
was trying to find you to warn you, I heard Malfoy saying he was
going to catch you, he said you had a drag --"

    Harry shook his head violently to shut Neville up, but Professor
McGonagall had seen. She looked more likely to breathe fire than
Norbert as she towered over the three of them.

    "I would never have believed it of any of you. Mr. Filch
says you were up in the astronomy tower. It's one o'clock in the
morning. Explain yourselves."

    It was the first time Hermione had ever failed to answer a
teacher's question. She was staring at her slippers, as still as
a statue.

    "I think I've got a good idea of what's been going on," said
Professor McGonagall. "It doesn't take a genius to work it out. You
fed Draco Malfoy some cock-and-bull story about a dragon, trying
to get him out of bed and into trouble. I've already caught him. I
suppose you think it's funny that Longbottom here heard the story
and believed it, too?"

    Harry caught Neville's eye and tried to tell him without words
that this wasn't true, because Neville was looking stunned and
hurt. Poor, blundering Neville -- Harry knew what it must have cost
him to try and find them in the dark, to warn them.

    "I'm disgusted," said Professor McGonagall. "Four students out
of bed in one night! I've never heard of such a thing before! You,
Miss Granger, I thought you had more sense. As for you, Mr. Potter,
I thought Gryffindor meant more to you than this. All three of you
will receive detentions -- yes, you too, Mr. Longbottom, nothing
gives you the right to walk around school at night, especially
these days, it's very dangerous -- and fifty points will be taken
from Gryffindor."

    "Fifty?" Harry gasped -- they would lose the lead, the lead
he'd won in the last Quidditch match.

    "Fifty points each," said Professor McGonagall, breathing
heavily through her long, pointed nose.

    "Professor -- please

    "You can't --"

    "Don't tell me what I can and can't do, Potter. Now get back
to bed, all of you. I've never been more ashamed of Gryffindor
students."

    A hundred and fifty points lost. That put Gryffindor in last
place. In one night, they'd ruined any chance Gryffindor had had
for the house cup. Harry felt as though the bottom had dropped out
of his stomach. How could they ever make up for this?

    Harry didn't sleep all night. He could hear Neville sobbing
into his pillow for what seemed like hours. Harry couldn't think
of anything to say to comfort him. He knew Neville, like himself,
was dreading the dawn. What would happen when the rest of Gryffindor
found out what they'd done?

    At first, Gryffindors passing the giant hourglasses that recorded
the house points the next day thought there'd been a mistake. How
could they suddenly have a hundred and fifty points fewer than
yesterday? And then the story started to spread: Harry Potter, the
famous Harry Potter, their hero of two Quidditch matches, had lo st
them all those points, him and a couple of other stupid first years.

    From being one of the most popular and admired people at the
school, Harry was suddenly the most hated. Even Ravenclaws and
Hufflepuffs turned on him, because everyone had been longing to
see Slytherin lose the house cup. Everywhere Harry went, people
pointed and didn't trouble to lower their voices as they insulted
him. Slytherins, on the other hand, clapped as he walked past them,
whistling and cheering, "Thanks Potter, we owe you one!"

    Only Ron stood by him.

    "They'll all forget this in a few weeks. Fred and George have
lost loads of points in all the time they've been here, and people
still like them."

    "They've never lost a hundred and fifty points in one go,
though, have they?" said Harry miserably.

    "Well -- no," Ron admitted.

    It was a bit late to repair the damage, but Harry swore to
himself not to meddle in things that weren't his business from
now on. He'd had it with sneaking around and spying. He felt so
ashamed of himself that he went to Wood and offered to resign from
the Quidditch team.

    "Resign?" Wood thundered. "What good'll that do? How are we
going to get any points back if we can't win at Quidditch?"

    But even Quidditch had lost its fun. The rest of the team
wouldn't speak to Harry during practice, and if they had to speak
about him, they called him "the Seeker."

    Hermione and Neville were suffering, too. They didn't have as
bad a time as Harry, because they weren't as well-known, but nobody
would speak to them, either. Hermione had stopped drawing attention
to herself in class, keeping her head down and working in silence.

    Harry was almost glad that the exams weren't far away. All the
studying he had to do kept his mind off his misery. He, Ron, and
Hermione kept to themselves, working late into the night, trying
to remember the ingredients in complicated potions, learn charms
and spells by heart, memorize the dates of magical discoveries and
goblin rebellions....

    Then, about a week before the exams were due to start, Harry's
new resolution not to interfere in anything that didn't concern him
was put to an unexpected test. Walking back from the library on his
own one afternoon, he heard somebody whimpering from a classroom
up ahead. As he drew closer, he heard Quirrell's voice.

    "No -- no -- not again, please --"

    It sounded as though someone was threatening him. Harry moved
closer.

    "All right -- all right --" he heard Quirrell sob.

    Next second, Quirrell came hurrying out of the classroom
straightening his turban. He was pale and looked as though he was
about to cry. He strode out of sight; Harry didn't think Quirrell
had even noticed him. He waited until Quirrell's footsteps had
disappeared, then peered into the classroom. It was empty, but
a door stood ajar at the other end. Harry was halfway toward it
before he remembered what he'd promised himself about not meddling.

    All the same, he'd have gambled twelve Sorcerer's Stones that
Snape had just left the room, and from what Harry had just heard,
Snape would be walking with a new spring in his step -- Quirrell
seemed to have given in at last.

    Harry went back to the library, where Hermione was testing Ron
on Astronomy. Harry told them what he'd heard.

    "Snape's done it, then!" said Ron. "If Quirrell's told him how
to break his Anti-Dark Force spell --"

    "There's still Fluffy, though," said Hermione.

    "Maybe Snape's found out how to get past him without asking
Hagrid," said Ron, looking up at the thousands of books surrounding
them. "I bet there's a book somewhere in here telling you how to
get past a giant three-headed dog. So what do we do, Harry?"

    The light of adventure was kindling again in Ron's eyes, but
Hermione answered before Harry could.

    "Go to Dumbledore. That's what we should have done ages ago. If
we try anything ourselves we'll be thrown out for sure."

    "But we've got no proof!" said Harry. "Quirrell's too scared to
back us up. Snape's only got to say he doesn't know how the troll
got in at Halloween and that he was nowhere near the third floor --
who do you think they'll believe, him or us? It's not exactly a
secret we hate him, Dumbledore'll think we made it up to get him
sacked. Filch wouldn't help us if his life depended on it, he's
too friendly with Snape, and the more students get thrown out,
the better, he'll think. And don't forget, we're not supposed to
know about the Stone or Fluffy. That'll take a lot of explaining."

    Hermione looked convinced, but Ron didn't.

    "If we just do a bit of poking around --"

    "No," said Harry flatly, "we've done enough poking around."

    He pulled a map of Jupiter toward him and started to learn the
names of its moons.

    The following morning, notes were delivered to Harry, Hermione,
and Neville at the breakfast table. They were all the same:

    Your detention will take place at eleven o'clock tonight. Meet
Mr. Filch in the entrance hall.

    Professor McGonagall Harry had forgotten they still had
detentions to do in the furor over the points they'd lost. He half
expected Hermione to complain that this was a whole night of studying
lost, but she didn't say a word. Like Harry, she felt they deserved
what they'd got.

    At eleven o'clock that night, they said good-bye to Ron in the
common room and went down to the entrance hall with Neville. Filch
was already there -- and so was Malfoy. Harry had also forgotten
that Malfoy had gotten a detention, too.

    "Follow me," said Filch, lighting a lamp and leading them
outside.

    I bet you'll think twice about breaking a school rule again,
won't you, eh?" he said, leering at them. "Oh yes... hard work and
pain are the best teachers if you ask me.... It's just a pity they
let the old punishments die out... hang you by your wrists from the
ceiling for a few days, I've got the chains still in my office, keep
'em well oiled in case they're ever needed.... Right, off we go, and
don't think of running off, now, it'll be worse for you if you do."

    They marched off across the dark grounds. Neville kept
sniffing. Harry wondered what their punishment was going to be. It
must be something really horrible, or Filch wouldn't be sounding
so delighted.

    The moon was bright, but clouds scudding across it kept throwing
them into darkness. Ahead, Harry could see the lighted windows of
Hagrid's hut. Then they heard a distant shout.

    "Is that you, Filch? Hurry up, I want ter get started."

    Harry's heart rose; if they were going to be working with Hagrid
it wouldn't be so bad. His relief must have showed in his -face,
because Filch said, "I suppose you think you'll be enjoying yourself
with that oaf? Well, think again, boy -- it's into the forest you're
going and I'm much mistaken if you'll all come out in one piece."

    At this, Neville let out a little moan, and Malfoy stopped dead
in his tracks.

    "The forest?" he repeated, and he didn't sound quite as cool
as usual. "We can't go in there at night -- there's all sorts of
things in there -- werewolves, I heard."

    Neville clutched the sleeve of Harry's robe and made a choking
noise.

    "That's your problem, isn't it?" said Filch, his voice cracking
with glee. "Should've thought of them werewolves before you got in
trouble, shouldn't you?"

    Hagrid came striding toward them out of the dark, Fang at his
heel. He was carrying his large crossbow, and a quiver of arrows
hung over his shoulder.

    "Abou' time," he said. "I bin waitin' fer half an hour
already. All right, Harry, Hermione?"

    "I shouldn't be too friendly to them, Hagrid," said Filch coldly,
they're here to be punished, after all."

    "That's why yer late, is it?" said Hagrid, frowning at
Filch. "Bin lecturin' them, eh? 'Snot your place ter do that. Yeh've
done yer bit, I'll take over from here."

    "I'll be back at dawn," said Filch, "for what's left of them,"
he added nastily, and he turned and started back toward the castle,
his lamp bobbing away in the darkness.

    Malfoy now turned to Hagrid.

    "I'm not going in that forest, he said, and Harry was pleased
to hear the note of panic in his voice.

    "Yeh are if yeh want ter stay at Hogwarts," said Hagrid
fiercely. "Yeh've done wrong an' now yehve got ter pay fer it."

    "But this is servant stuff, it's not for students to do. I
thought we'd be copying lines or something, if my father knew I
was doing this, he'd

    tell yer that's how it is at Hogwarts," Hagrid growled. "Copyin'
lines! What good's that ter anyone? Yeh'll do summat useful or
Yeh'll get out. If yeh think yer father'd rather you were expelled,
then get back off ter the castle an' pack. Go on"'

    Malfoy didn't move. He looked at Hagrid furiously, but then
dropped his gaze.

    "Right then," said Hagrid, "now, listen carefully, 'cause it's
dangerous what we're gonna do tonight, an' I don' want no one takin'
risks. Follow me over here a moment."

    He led them to the very edge of the forest. Holding his lamp up
high, he pointed down a narrow, winding earth track that disappeared
into the thick black trees. A light breeze lifted their hair as
they looked into the forest.

    "Look there," said Hagrid, "see that stuff shinin' on the
ground? Silvery stuff? That's unicorn blood. There's a unicorn
in there bin hurt badly by summat. This is the second time in a
week. I found one dead last Wednesday. We're gonna try an' find
the poor thing. We might have ter put it out of its misery."

    "And what if whatever hurt the unicorn finds us first?" said
Malfoy, unable to keep the fear out of his voice.

    "There's nothin' that lives in the forest that'll hurt yeh if
yer with me or Fang," said Hagrid. "An' keep ter the path. Right,
now, we're gonna split inter two parties an' follow the trail in
diff'rent directions. There's blood all over the place, it must've
bin staggerin' around since last night at least."

    "I want Fang," said Malfoy quickly, looking at Fang's long teeth.

    "All right, but I warn yeh, he's a coward," said Hagrid. "
So me, Harry, an' Hermione'll go one way an' Draco, Neville, an'
Fang'll go the other. Now, if any of us finds the unicorn, we'll
send up green sparks, right? Get yer wands out an' practice now --
that's it -- an' if anyone gets in trouble, send up red sparks,
an' we'll all come an' find yeh -- so, be careful -- let's go."

    The forest was black and silent. A little way into it they
reached a fork in the earth path, and Harry, Hermione, and Hagrid
took the left path while Malfoy, Neville, and Fang took the right.

    They walked in silence, their eyes on the ground. Every now
and then a ray of moonlight through the branches above lit a spot
of silver-blue blood on the fallen leaves.

    Harry saw that Hagrid looked very worried.

    "Could a werewolf be killing the unicorns?" Harry asked.

    "Not fast enough," said Hagrid. "It's not easy ter catch a
unicorn, they're powerful magic creatures. I never knew one ter be
hurt before."

    They walked past a mossy tree stump. Harry could hear running
water; there must be a stream somewhere close by. There were still
spots of unicorn blood here and there along the winding path.

    "You all right, Hermione?" Hagrid whispered. "Don' worry, it
can't've gone far if it's this badly hurt, an' then we'll be able
ter -- GET BEHIND THAT TREE!"

    Hagrid seized Harry and Hermione and hoisted them off the
path behind a towering oak. He pulled out an arrow and fitted it
into his crossbow, raising it, ready to fire. The three of them
listened. Something was slithering over dead leaves nearby: it
sounded like a cloak trailing along the ground. Hagrid was squinting
up the dark path, but after a few seconds, the sound faded away.

    "I knew it, " he murmured. "There's summat in here that shouldn'
be."

    "A werewolf?" Harry suggested.

    "That wasn' no werewolf an' it wasn' no unicorn, neither,"
said Hagrid grimly. "Right, follow me, but careful, now."

    They walked more slowly, ears straining for the faintest
sound. Suddenly, in a clearing ahead, something definitely moved.

    "Who's there?" Hagrid called. "Show yerself -- I'm armed!"

    And into the clearing came -- was it a man, or a horse? To
the waist, a man, with red hair and beard, but below that was a
horse's gleaming chestnut body with a long, reddish tail. Harry
and Hermione's jaws dropped.

    "Oh, it's you, Ronan," said Hagrid in relief. "How are yeh?"

    He walked forward and shook the centaur's hand.

    "Good evening to you, Hagrid," said Ronan. He had a deep,
sorrowful voice. "Were you going to shoot me?"

    "Can't be too careful, Ronan," said Hagrid, patting his
crossbow. "There's summat bad loose in this forest. This is
Harry Potter an' Hermione Granger, by the way. Students up at the
school. An' this is Ronan, you two. He's a centaur.))

    "We'd noticed," said Hermione faintly.

    "Good evening," said Ronan. "Students, are you? And do you
learn much, up at the school?"

    "Erm --"

    "A bit," said Hermione timidly.

    "A bit. Well, that's something." Ronan sighed. He flung back
his head and stared at the sky. "Mars is bright tonight."

    "Yeah," said Hagrid, glancing up, too. "Listen, I'm glad
we've run inter yeh, Ronan, 'cause there's a unicorn bin hurt --
you seen anythin'?"

    Ronan didn't answer immediately. He stared unblinkingly upward,
then sighed again.

    "Always the innocent are the first victims," he said. "So it
has been for ages past, so it is now."

    "Yeah," said Hagrid, "but have yeh seen anythin', Ronan? Anythin'
unusual?"

    "Mars is bright tonight," Ronan repeated, while Hagrid watched
him impatiently. "Unusually bright."

    "Yeah, but I was meanin' anythin' unusual a bit nearer home,
said Hagrid. "So yeh haven't noticed anythin' strange?"

    Yet again, Ronan took a while to answer. At last, he said,
"The forest hides many secrets."

    A movement in the trees behind Ronan made Hagrid raise his bow
again, but it was only a second centaur, black-haired and -bodied
and wilder-looking than Ronan.

    "Hullo, Bane," said Hagrid. "All right?"

    "Good evening, Hagrid, I hope you are well?"

    "Well enough. Look, I've jus' bin askin' Ronan, you seen anythin'
odd in here lately? There's a unicorn bin injured -- would yeh know
anythin' about it?"

    Bane walked over to stand next to Ronan. He looked skyward. "Mars
is bright tonight," he said simply.

    "We've heard," said Hagrid grumpily. "Well, if either of you
do see anythin', let me know, won't yeh? We'll be off, then."

    Harry and Hermione followed him out of the clearing, staring over
their shoulders at Ronan and Bane until the trees blocked their view.

    "Never," said Hagrid irritably, "try an' get a straight answer
out of a centaur. Ruddy stargazers. Not interested in anythin'
closer'n the moon."

    "Are there many of them in here?" asked Hermione.

    "Oh, a fair few... Keep themselves to themselves mostly, but
they're good enough about turnin' up if ever I want a word. They're
deep, mind, centaurs... they know things... jus' don' let on much."

    "D'you think that was a centaur we heard earlier?" said Harry.

    "Did that sound like hooves to you? Nah, if yeh ask me, that
was what's bin killin' the unicorns -- never heard anythin' like
it before."

    They walked on through the dense, dark trees. Harry kept looking
nervously over his shoulder. He had the nasty feeling they were
being watched. He was very glad they had Hagrid and his crossbow
with them. They had just passed a bend in the path when Hermione
grabbed Hagrid's arm.

    "Hagrid! Look! Red sparks, the others are in trouble!"

    "You two wait here!" Hagrid shouted. "Stay on the path, I'll
come back for yeh!"

    They heard him crashing away through the undergrowth and stood
looking at each other, very scared, until they couldn't hear anything
but the rustling of leaves around them.

    "You don't think they've been hurt, do you?" whispered Hermione.

    "I don't care if Malfoy has, but if something's got
Neville... it's our fault he's here in the first place."

    The minutes dragged by. Their ears seemed sharper than
usual. Harry's seemed to be picking up every sigh of the wind,
every cracking twig. What was going on? Where were the others?

    At last, a great crunching noise announced Hagrid's
return. Malfoy, Neville, and Fang were with him. Hagrid was
fuming. Malfoy, it seemed, had sneaked up behind Neville and grabbed
him as a joke. Neville had panicked and sent up the sparks.

    "We'll be lucky ter catch anythin' now, with the racket you two
were makin'. Right, we're changin' groups -- Neville, you stay with
me an' Hermione, Harry, you go with Fang an' this idiot. I'm sorry,"
Hagrid added in a whisper to Harry, "but he'll have a harder time
frightenin' you, an' we've gotta get this done."

    So Harry set off into the heart of the forest with Malfoy and
Fang. They walked for nearly half an hour, deeper and deeper into the
forest, until the path became almost impossible to follow because the
trees were so thick. Harry thought the blood seemed to be getting
thicker. There were splashes on the roots of a tree, as though the
poor creature had been thrashing around in pain close by. Harry could
see a clearing ahead, through the tangled branches of an ancient oak.

    "Look --" he murmured, holding out his arm to stop Malfoy.

    Something bright white was gleaming on the ground. They inched
closer.

    It was the unicorn all right, and it was dead. Harry had never
seen anything so beautiful and sad. Its long, slender legs were
stuck out at odd angles where it had fallen and its mane was spread
pearly-white on the dark leaves.

    Harry had taken one step toward it when a slithering sound
made him freeze where he stood. A bush on the edge of the clearing
quivered.... Then, out of the shadows, a hooded figure came crawling
across the ground like some stalking beast. Harry, Malfoy, and Fang
stood transfixed. The cloaked figure reached the unicorn, lowered
its head over the wound in the animal's side, and began to drink
its blood.

    "AAAAAAAAAARGH!"

    Malfoy let out a terrible scream and bolted -- so did Fang. The
hooded figure raised its head and looked right at Harry -- unicorn
blood was dribbling down its front. It got to its feet and came
swiftly toward Harry -- he couldn't move for fear.

    Then a pain like he'd never felt before pierced his head; it
was as though his scar were on fire. Half blinded, he staggered
backward. He heard hooves behind him, galloping, and something
jumped clean over Harry, charging at the figure.

    The pain in Harry's head was so bad he fell to his knees. It
took a minute or two to pass. When he looked up, the figure had
gone. A centaur was standing over him, not Ronan or Bane; this one
looked younger; he had white-blond hair and a palomino body.

    "Are you all right?" said the centaur, pulling Harry to his feet.

    "Yes -- thank you -- what was that?"

    The centaur didn't answer. He had astonishingly blue eyes, like
pale sapphires. He looked carefully at Harry, his eyes lingering
on the scar that stood out, livid, on Harry's forehead.

    "You are the Potter boy," he said. "You had better get back
to Hagrid. The forest is not safe at this time -- especially for
you. Can you ride? It will be quicker this way.

    "My name is Firenze," he added, as he lowered himself on to
his front legs so that Harry could clamber onto his back.

    There was suddenly a sound of more galloping from the other side
of the clearing. Ronan and Bane came bursting through the trees,
their flanks heaving and sweaty.

    "Firenze!" Bane thundered. "What are you doing? You have a
human on your back! Have you no shame? Are you a common mule?"

    "Do you realize who this is?" said Firenze. "This is the Potter
boy. The quicker he leaves this forest, the better."

    "What have you been telling him?" growled Bane. "Remember,
Firenze, we are sworn not to set ourselves against the heavens. Have
we not read what is to come in the movements of the planets?"

    Ronan pawed the ground nervously. "I'm sure Firenze thought he
was acting for the best, " he said in his gloomy voice.

    Bane kicked his back legs in anger.

    "For the best! What is that to do with us? Centaurs are concerned
with what has been foretold! It is not our business to run around
like donkeys after stray humans in our forest!"

    Firenze suddenly reared on to his hind legs in anger, so that
Harry had to grab his shoulders to stay on.

    "Do you not see that unicorn?" Firenze bellowed at Bane. "Do
you not understand why it was killed? Or have the planets not let
you in on that secret? I set myself against what is lurking in this
forest, Bane, yes, with humans alongside me if I must."

    And Firenze whisked around; with Harry clutching on as best
he could, they plunged off into the trees, leaving Ronan and Bane
behind them.

    Harry didn't have a clue what was going on.

    "Why's Bane so angry?" he asked. "What was that thing you saved
me from, anyway?"

    Firenze slowed to a walk, warned Harry to keep his head
bowed in case of low-hanging branches, but did not answer Harry's
question. They made their way through the trees in silence for
so long that Harry thought Firenze didn't want to talk to him
anymore. They were passing through a particularly dense patch of
trees, however, when Firenze suddenly stopped.

    "Harry Potter, do you know what unicorn blood is used -for?"

    "No," said Harry, startled by the odd question. "We've only
used the horn and tail hair in Potions."

    "That is because it is a monstrous thing, to slay a unicorn,"
said Firenze. "Only one who has nothing to lose, and everything
to gain, would commit such a crime. The blood of a unicorn will
keep you alive, even if you are an inch from death, but at a
terrible price. You have slain something pure and defenseless to
save yourself, and you will have but a half-life, a cursed life,
from the moment the blood touches your lips."

    Harry stared at the back of Firenze's head, which was dappled
silver in the moonlight.

    "But who'd be that desperate?" he wondered aloud. "If you're
going to be cursed forever, deaths better, isn't it?"

    "It is," Firenze agreed, "unless all you need is to stay alive
long enough to drink something else -- something that will bring
you back to full strength and power -- something that will mean
you can never die. Mr. Potter, do you know what is hidden in the
school at this very moment?"

    "The Sorcerer's Stone! Of course -- the Elixir of Life! But I
don't understand who --"

    "Can you think of nobody who has waited many years to return
to power, who has clung to life, awaiting their chance?"

    It was as though an iron fist had clenched suddenly around
Harry's heart. Over the rustling of the trees, he seemed to hear
once more what Hagrid had told him on the night they had met:
"Some say he died. Codswallop, in my opinion. Dunno if he had enough
human left in him to die."

    "Do you mean," Harry croaked, "that was Vol-"

    "Harry! Harry, are you all right?"

    Hermione was running toward them down the path, Hagrid puffing
along behind her.

    "I'm fine," said Harry, hardly knowing what he was saying. "The
unicorn's dead, Hagrid, it's in that clearing back there."

    "This is where I leave you," Firenze murmured as Hagrid hurried
off to examine the unicorn. "You are safe now."

    Harry slid off his back.

    "Good luck, Harry Potter," said Firenze. "The planets have been
read wrongly before now, even by centaurs. I hope this is one of
those times."

    He turned and cantered back into the depths of the forest,
leaving Harry shivering behind him.

    Ron had fallen asleep in the dark common room, waiting for
them to return. He shouted something about Quidditch fouls when
Harry roughly shook him awake. In a matter of seconds, though,
he was wide-eyed as Harry began to tell him and Hermione what had
happened in the forest.

    Harry couldn't sit down. He paced up and down in front of the
fire. He was still shaking.

    "Snape wants the stone for Voldemort... and Voldemort's waiting
in the forest... and all this time we thought Snape just wanted to
get rich...."

    "Stop saying the name!" said Ron in a terrified whisper, as if
he thought Voldemort could hear them.

    Harry wasn't listening.

    "Firenze saved me, but he shouldn't have done so.... Bane was
furious... he was talking about interfering with what the planets
say is going to happen.... They must show that Voldemort's coming
back.... Bane thinks Firenze should have let Voldemort kill me.... I
suppose that's written in the stars as well."

    "Will you stop saying the name!" Ron hissed.

    "So all I've got to wait for now is Snape to steal the Stone,"
Harry went on feverishly, "then Voldemort will be able to come and
finish me off... Well, I suppose Bane'll be happy."

    Hermione looked very frightened, but she had a word of comfort.

    "Harry, everyone says Dumbledore's the only one You-Know-Who
was ever afraid of With Dumbledore around, You-Know-Who won't
touch you. Anyway, who says the centaurs are right? It sounds like
fortune-telling to me, and Professor McGonagall says that's a very
imprecise branch of magic."

    The sky had turned light before they stopped talking. They went
to bed exhausted, their throats sore. But the night's surprises
weren't over.

    When Harry pulled back his sheets, he found his invisibility
cloak folded neatly underneath them. There was a note pinned to it:

    Just in case.

    CHAPTER SIXTEEN

    THROUGH THE TRAPDOOR

    In years to come, Harry would never quite remember how he had
managed to get through his exams when he half expected Voldemort to
come bursting through the door at any moment. Yet the days crept by,
and there could be no doubt that Fluffy was still alive and well
behind the locked door.

    It was sweltering hot, especially in the large classroom where
they did their written papers. They had been given special, new
quills for the exams, which had been bewitched with an AntiCheating
spell.

    They had practical exams as well. Professor Flitwick called them
one by one into his class to see if they could make a pineapple
tapdance across a desk. Professor McGonagall watched them turn
a mouse into a snuffbox -- points were given for how pretty the
snuffbox was, but taken away if it had whiskers. Snape made them
all nervous, breathing down their necks while they tried to remember
how to make a Forgetfulness potion.

    Harry did the best he could, trying to ignore the stabbing
pains in his forehead, which had been bothering him ever since his
trip into the forest. Neville thought Harry had a bad case of exam
nerves because Harry couldn't sleep, but the truth was that Harry
kept being woken by his old nightmare, except that it was now worse
than ever because there was a hooded figure dripping blood in it.

    Maybe it was because they hadn't seen what Harry had seen in
the forest, or because they didn't have scars burning on their
foreheads, but Ron and Hermione didn't seem as worried about the
Stone as Harry. The idea of Voldemort certainly scared them, but
he didn't keep visiting them in dreams, and they were so busy with
their studying they didn't have much time to fret about what Snape
or anyone else might be up to.

    Their very last exam was History of Magic. One hour of answering
questions about batty old wizards who'd invented selfstirring
cauldrons and they'd be free, free for a whole wonderful week until
their exam results came out. When the ghost of Professor Binns
told them to put down their quills and roll up their parchment,
Harry couldn't help cheering with the rest.

    "That was far easier than I thought it would be," said Hermione
as they joined the crowds flocking out onto the sunny grounds. "I
needn't have learned about the 1637 Werewolf Code of Conduct or
the uprising of Elfric the Eager."

    Hermione always liked to go through their exam papers afterward,
but Ron said this made him feel ill, so they wandered down to the
lake and flopped under a tree. The Weasley twins and Lee Jordan
were tickling the tentacles of a giant squid, which was basking
in the warm shallows. "No more studying," Ron sighed happily,
stretching out on the grass. "You could look more cheerful, Harry,
we've got a week before we find out how badly we've done, there's
no need to worry yet."

    Harry was rubbing his forehead.

    "I wish I knew what this means!" he burst out angrily. "My scar
keeps hurting -- it's happened before, but never as often as this."

    "Go to Madam Pomfrey," Hermione suggested.

    "I'm not ill," said Harry. "I think it's a warning... it means
danger's coming...."

    Ron couldn't get worked up, it was too hot.

    "Harry, relax, Hermione's right, the Stone's safe as long as
Dumbledore's around. Anyway, we've never had any proof Snape found
out how to get past Fluffy. He nearly had his leg ripped off once,
he's not going to try it again in a hurry. And Neville will play
Quidditch for England before Hagrid lets Dumbledore down."

    Harry nodded, but he couldn't shake off a lurking feeling that
there was something he'd forgotten to do, something important. When
he tried to explain this, Hermione said, "That's just the exams. I
woke up last night and was halfway through my Transfiguration notes
before I remembered we'd done that one."

    Harry was quite sure the unsettled feeling didn't have anything
to do with work, though. He watched an owl flutter toward the school
across the bright blue sky, a note clamped in its mouth. Hagrid
was the only one who ever sent him letters. Hagrid would never
betray Dumbledore. Hagrid would never tell anyone how to get past
Fluffy... never... but --

    Harry suddenly jumped to his feet.

    "Where're you going?" said Ron sleepily.

    "I've just thought of something," said Harry. He had turned
white. "We've got to go and see Hagrid, now."

    "Why?" panted Hermione, hurrying to keep up.

    "Don't you think it's a bit odd," said Harry, scrambling up the
grassy slope, "that what Hagrid wants more than anything else is a
dragon, and a stranger turns up who just happens to have an egg in
his pocket? How many people wander around with dragon eggs if it's
against wizard law? Lucky they found Hagrid, don't you think? Why
didn't I see it before?"

    "What are you talking about?" said Ron, but Harry, sprinting
across the grounds toward the forest, didn't answer.

    Hagrid was sitting in an armchair outside his house; his
trousers and sleeves were rolled up, and he was shelling peas into
a large bowl.

    "Hullo," he said, smiling. "Finished yer exams? Got time fer
a drink?"

    "Yes, please," said Ron, but Harry cut him off.

    "No, we're in a hurry. Hagrid, I've got to ask you something. You
know that night you won Norbert? What did the stranger you were
playing cards with look like?"

    "Dunno," said Hagrid casually, "he wouldn' take his cloak off."

    He saw the three of them look stunned and raised his eyebrows.

    "It's not that unusual, yeh get a lot o' funny folk in the Hog's
Head -- that's the pub down in the village. Mighta bin a dragon
dealer, mightn' he? I never saw his face, he kept his hood up."

    Harry sank down next to the bowl of peas. "What did you talk
to him about, Hagrid? Did you mention Hogwarts at all?"

    "Mighta come up," said Hagrid, frowning as he tried to
remember. "Yeah... he asked what I did, an' I told him I was
gamekeeper here.... He asked a bit about the sorta creatures I took
after... so I told him... an' I said what I'd always really wanted
was a dragon... an' then... I can' remember too well, 'cause he
kept buyin' me drinks.... Let's see... yeah, then he said he had
the dragon egg an' we could play cards fer it if I wanted... but he
had ter be sure I could handle it, he didn' want it ter go ter any
old home.... So I told him, after Fluffy, a dragon would be easy..."

    "And did he -- did he seem interested in Fluffy?" Harry asked,
try ing to keep his voice calm.

    "Well -- yeah -- how many three-headed dogs d'yeh meet, even
around Hogwarts? So I told him, Fluffy's a piece o' cake if yeh
know how to calm him down, jus' play him a bit o' music an' he'll
go straight off ter sleep --"

    Hagrid suddenly looked horrified.

    "I shouldn'ta told yeh that!" he blurted out. "Forget I said
it! Hey -- where're yeh goin'?"

    Harry, Ron, and Hermione didn't speak to each other at all
until they came to a halt in the entrance hall, which seemed very
cold and gloomy after the grounds.

    "We've got to go to Dumbledore," said Harry. "Hagrid told
that stranger how to get past Fluffy, and it was either Snape or
Voldemort under that cloak -- it must've been easy, once he'd got
Hagrid drunk. I just hope Dumbledore believes us. Firenze might
back us up if Bane doesn't stop him. Where's Dumbledore's office?"

    They looked around, as if hoping to see a sign pointing them
in the right direction. They had never been told where Dumbledore
lived, nor did they know anyone who had been sent to see him.

    "We'll just have to --" Harry began, but a voice suddenly rang
across the hall.

    "What are you three doing inside?"

    It was Professor McGonagall, carrying a large pile of books.

    "We want to see Professor Dumbledore," said Hermione, rather
bravely, Harry and Ron thought.

    "See Professor Dumbledore?" Professor McGonagall repeated,
as though this was a very fishy thing to want to do. "Why?"

    Harry swallowed -- now what?

    "It's sort of secret," he said, but he wished at once he hadn't,
because Professor McGonagall's nostrils flared.

    "Professor Dumbledore left ten minutes ago," she said coldly. "He
received an urgent owl from the Ministry of Magic and flew off for
London at once."

    "He's gone?" said Harry frantically. "Now?"

    "Professor Dumbledore is a very great wizard, Potter, he has
many demands on his time --

    "But this is important."

    "Something you have to say is more important than the Ministry
of Magic, Potter.

    "Look," said Harry, throwing caution to the winds, "Professor --
it's about the Sorcerer's tone --"

    Whatever Professor McGonagall had expected, it wasn't that. The
books she was carrying tumbled out of her arms, but she didn't pick
them up. "How do you know --?" she spluttered.

    "Professor, I think -- I know -- that Sn- that someone's going to
try and steal the Stone. I've got to talk to Professor Dumbledore."

    She eyed him with a mixture of shock and suspicion.

    "Professor Dumbledore will be back tomorrow," she said finally. I
don't know how you found out about the Stone, but rest assured,
no one can possibly steal it, it's too well protected."

    "But Professor --"

    "Potter, I know what I'm talking about," she said shortly. She
bent down and gathered up the fallen books. I suggest you all go
back outside and enjoy the sunshine."

    But they didn't.

    "It's tonight," said Harry, once he was sure Professor McGonagall
was out of earshot. "Snape's going through the trapdoor tonight. He's
found out everything he needs, and now he's got Dumbledore out of
the way. He sent that note, I bet the Ministry of Magic will get
a real shock when Dumbledore turns up."

    "But what can we --"

    Hermione gasped. Harry and Ron wheeled round.

    Snape was standing there.

    "Good afternoon," he said smoothly.

    They stared at him.

    "You shouldn't be inside on a day like this," he said, with an
odd, twisted smile.

    "We were --" Harry began, without any idea what he was going
to say.

    "You want to be more careful," said Snape. "Hanging around

    like this, people will think you're up to something. And
Gryffindor really can't afford to lose any more points, can it?"

    Harry flushed. They turned to go outside, but Snape called
them back.

    "Be warned, Potter -- any more nighttime wanderings and I will
personally make sure you are expelled. Good day to you."

    He strode off in the direction of the staffroom.

    Out on the stone steps, Harry turned to the others.

    "Right, here's what we've got to do," he whispered urgently. "One
of us has got to keep an eye on Snape -- wait outside the staff
room and follow him if he leaves it. Hermione, you'd better do that."

    "Why me?"

    "It's obvious," said Ron. "You can pretend to be waiting
for Professor Flitwick, you know." He put on a high voice, "'Oh
Professor Flitwick, I'm so worried, I think I got question fourteen
b wrong....'"

    "Oh, shut up," said Hermione, but she agreed to go and watch
out for Snape.

    "And we'd better stay outside the third-floor corridor," Harry
told Ron. "Come on."

    But that part of the plan didn't work. No sooner had they reached
the door separating Fluffy from the rest of the school than Professor
McGonagall turned up again and this time, she lost her temper.

    "I suppose you think you're harder to get past than a pack of
enchantments!" she stormed. "Enough of this nonsense! If I hear you
've come anywhere near here again, I'll take another fifty points
from Gryffindor! Yes, Weasley, from my own house!" Harry and Ron went
back to the common room, Harry had just said, "At least Hermione's
on Snape's tail," when the portrait of the Fat Lady swung open and
Hermione came in.

    "I'm sorry, Harry!" she wailed. "Snape came out and asked me what
I was doing, so I said I was waiting for Flitwick, and Snape went to
get him, and I've only just got away, I don't know where Snape went."

    "Well, that's it then, isn't it?" Harry said.

    The other two stared at him. He was pale and his eyes were
glittering.

    "I'm going out of here tonight and I'm going to try and get to
the Stone first."

    "You're mad!" said Ron.

    "You can't!" said Hermione. "After what McGonagall and Snape
have said? You'll be expelled!"

    "SO WHAP" Harry shouted. "Don't you understand? If Snape gets
hold of the Stone, Voldemort's coming back! Haven't you heard what
it was like when he was trying to take over? There won't be any
Hogwarts to get expelled from! He'll flatten it, or turn it into
a school for the Dark Arts! Losing points doesn't matter anymore,
can't you see? D'you think he'll leave you and your families alone
if Gryffindor wins the house cup? If I get caught before I can get
to the Stone, well, I'll have to go back to the Dursleys and wait
for Voldemort to find me there, it's only dying a bit later than
I would have, because I'm never going over to the Dark Side! I'm
going through that trapdoor tonight and nothing you two say is
going to stop me! Voldemort killed my parents, remember?"

    He glared at them.

    "You're right Harry," said Hermione in a small voice.

    "I'll use the invisibility cloak," said Harry. "It's just lucky
I got it back."

    "But will it cover all three of us?" said Ron.

    "All -- all three of us?"

    "Oh, come off it, you don't think we'd let you go alone?"

    "Of course not," said Hermione briskly. "How do you think you'd
get to the Stone without us? I'd better go and took through my books,
there might be something useful..."

    "But if we get caught, you two will be expelled, too."

    "Not if I can help it," said Hermione grimly. "Flitwick
told me in secret that I got a hundred and twelve percent on his
exam. They're not throwing me out after that."

    After dinner the three of them sat nervously apart in the
common room. Nobody bothered them; none of the Gryffindors had
anything to say to Harry any more, after all. This was the first
night he hadn't been upset by it. Hermione was skimming through
all her notes, hoping to come across one of the enchantments they
were about to try to break. Harry and Ron didn't talk much. Both
of them were thinking about what they were about to do.

    Slowly, the room emptied as people drifted off to bed.

    "Better get the cloak," Ron muttered, as Lee Jordan finally
left, stretching and yawning. Harry ran upstairs to their dark
dormitory. He putted out the cloak and then his eyes fell on the
flute Hagrid had given him for Christmas. He pocketed it to use on
Fluffy -- he didn't feel much like singing.

    He ran back down to the common room.

    "We'd better put the cloak on here, and make sure it covers
all three of us -- if Filch spots one of our feet wandering along
on its own --"

    "What are you doing?" said a voice from the corner of the
room. Neville appeared from behind an armchair, clutching Trevor the
toad, who looked as though he'd been making another bid for freedom.

    "Nothing, Neville, nothing," said Harry, hurriedly putting the
cloak behind his back.

    Neville stared at their guilty faces.

    "You're going out again," he said.

    "No, no, no," said Hermione. "No, we're not. Why don't you go
to bed, Neville?"

    Harry looked at the grandfather clock by the door. They couldn't
afford to waste any more time, Snape might even now be playing
Fluffy to sleep.

    "You can't go out," said Neville, "you'll be caught
again. Gryffindor will be in even more trouble."

    "You don't understand," said Harry, "this is important."

    But Neville was clearly steeling himself to do something
desperate.

    I won't let you do it," he said, hurrying to stand in front of
the portrait hole. "I'll -- I'll fight you!"

    "Neville, "Ron exploded, "get away from that hole and don't be
an idiot --"

    "Don't you call me an idiot!" said Neville. I don't think you
should be breaking any more rules! And you were the one who told
me to stand up to people!"

    "Yes, but not to us," said Ron in exasperation. "Neville,
you don't know what you're doing."

    He took a step forward and Neville dropped Trevor the toad,
who leapt out of sight.

    "Go on then, try and hit me!" said Neville, raising his
fists. "I'm ready!"

    Harry turned to Hermione.

    "Do something," he said desperately.

    Hermione stepped forward.

    "Neville," she said, "I'm really, really sorry about this."

    She raised her wand.

    "Petrificus Totalus!" she cried, pointing it at Neville.

    Neville's arms snapped to his sides. His legs sprang
together. His whole body rigid, he swayed where he stood and then
fell flat on his face, stiff as a board.

    Hermione ran to turn him over. Neville's jaws were jammed
together so he couldn't speak. Only his eyes were moving, looking
at them in horror.

    "What've you done to him?" Harry whispered.

    "It's the full Body-Bind," said Hermione miserably. "Oh, Neville,
I'm so sorry."

    "We had to, Neville, no time to explain," said Harry.

    "You'll understand later, Neville," said Ron as they stepped
over him and pulled on the invisibility cloak.

    But leaving Neville lying motionless on the floor didn't feel
like a very good omen. In their nervous state, every statue's shadow
looked like Filch, every distant breath of wind sounded like Peeves
swooping down on them. At the foot of the first set of stairs,
they spotted Mrs. Norris skulking near the top.

    "Oh, let's kick her, just this once," Ron whispered in Harry's
ear, but Harry shook his head. As they climbed carefully around her,
Mrs. Norris turned her lamplike eyes on them, but didn't do anything.

    They didn't meet anyone else until they reached the staircase
up to the third floor. Peeves was bobbing halfway up, loosening
the carpet so that people would trip.

    "Who's there?" he said suddenly as they climbed toward him. He
narrowed his wicked black eyes. "Know you're there, even if I can't
see you. Are you ghoulie or ghostie or wee student beastie?"

    He rose up in the air and floated there, squinting at them.

    "Should call Filch, I should, if something's a-creeping around
unseen."

    Harry had a sudden idea.

    "Peeves," he said, in a hoarse whisper, "the Bloody Baron has
his own reasons for being invisible."

    Peeves almost fell out of the air in shock. He caught himself
in time and hovered about a foot off the stairs.

    "So sorry, your bloodiness, Mr. Baron, Sir," he said
greasily. "My mistake, my mistake -- I didn't see you -- of course
I didn't, you're invisible -- forgive old Peevsie his little joke,
sir."

    "I have business here, Peeves," croaked Harry. "Stay away from
this place tonight."

    "I will, sir, I most certainly will," said Peeves, rising up
in the air again. "Hope your business goes well, Baron, I'll not
bother you."

    And he scooted off

    "Brilliant, Harry!" whispered Ron.

    A few seconds later, they were there, outside the third-floor
corridor -- and the door was already ajar.

    "Well, there you are," Harry said quietly, "Snape's already
got past Fluffy."

    Seeing the open door somehow seemed to impress upon all three
of them what was facing them. Underneath the cloak, Harry turned
to the other two.

    "If you want to go back, I won't blame you," he said. "You can
take the cloak, I won't need it now."

    "Don't be stupid," said Ron.

    "We're coming," said Hermione.

    Harry pushed the door open.

    As the door creaked, low, rumbling growls met their ears. All
three of the dog's noses sniffed madly in their direction, even
though it couldn't see them.

    "What's that at its feet?" Hermione whispered.

    "Looks like a harp," said Ron. "Snape must have left it there."

    "It must wake up the moment you stop playing," said Harry. "Well,
here goes..."

    He put Hagrid's flute to his lips and blew. It wasn't really a
tune, but from the first note the beast's eyes began to droop. Harry
hardly drew breath. Slowly, the dog's growls ceased -- it tottered
on its paws and fell to its knees, then it slumped to the ground,
fast asleep.

    "Keep playing," Ron warned Harry as they slipped out of the
cloak and crept toward the trapdoor. They could feel the dog's hot,
smelly breath as they approached the giant heads. "I think we'll
be able to pull the door open," said Ron, peering over the dog's
back. "Want to go first, Hermione?"

    "No, I don't!"

    "All right." Ron gritted his teeth and stepped carefully over
the dog's legs. He bent and pulled the ring of the trapdoor, which
swung up and open.

    "What can you see?" Hermione said anxiously.

    "Nothing -- just black -- there's no way of climbing down,
we'll just have to drop."

    Harry, who was still playing the flute, waved at Ron to get
his attention and pointed at himself.

    "You want to go first? Are you sure?" said Ron. "I don't know
how deep this thing goes. Give the flute to Hermione so she can
keep him asleep."

    Harry handed the flute over. In the few seconds' silence, the
dog growled and twitched, but the moment Hermione began to play,
it fell back into its deep sleep.

    Harry climbed over it and looked down through the trapdoor. There
was no sign of the bottom.

    He lowered himself through the hole until he was hanging on by
his fingertips. Then he looked up at Ron and said, "If anything
happens to me, don't follow. Go straight to the owlery and send
Hedwig to Dumbledore, right?"

    "Right," said Ron.

    "See you in a minute, I hope...

    And Harry let go. Cold, damp air rushed past him as he fell
down, down, down and -- FLUMP. With a funny, muffled sort of thump
he landed on something soft. He sat up and felt around, his eyes
not used to the gloom. It felt as though he was sitting on some
sort of plant.

    "It's okay!" he called up to the light the size of a postage
stamp, which was the open trapdoor, "it's a soft landing, you
can jump!"

    Ron followed right away. He landed, sprawled next to Harry.

    "What's this stuff?" were his first words.

    "Dunno, some sort of plant thing. I suppose it's here to break
the fall. Come on, Hermione!"

    The distant music stopped. There was a loud bark from the dog,
but Hermione had already jumped. She landed on Harry's other side.

    "We must be miles under the school , she said.

    "Lucky this plant thing's here, really," said Ron.

    "Lucky!" shrieked Hermione. "Look at you both!"

    She leapt up and struggled toward a damp wall. She had to
struggle because the moment she had landed, the plant had started to
twist snakelike tendrils around her ankles. As for Harry and Ron,
their legs had already been bound tightly in long creepers without
their noticing.

    Hermione had managed to free herself before the plant got a
firm grip on her. Now she watched in horror as the two boys fought
to pull the plant off them, but the more they strained against it,
the tighter and faster the plant wound around them.

    "Stop moving!" Hermione ordered them. "I know what this is --
it's Devil's Snare!"

    "Oh, I'm so glad we know what it's called, that's a great help,"
snarled Ron, leaning back, trying to stop the plant from curling
around his neck. "Shut up, I'm trying to remember how to kill
it!" said Hermione.

    "Well, hurry up, I can't breathe!" Harry gasped, wrestling with
it as it curled around his chest.

    "Devil's Snare, Devil's Snare... what did Professor Sprout
say? -- it likes the dark and the damp

    "So light a fire!" Harry choked.

    "Yes -- of course -- but there's no wood!" Hermione cried,
wringing her hands.

    "HAVE YOU GONE MAD?" Ron bellowed. "ARE YOU A WITCH OR NOT?"

    "Oh, right!" said Hermione, and she whipped out her wand,
waved it, muttered something, and sent a jet of the same bluebell
flames she had used on Snape at the plant. In a matter of seconds,
the two boys felt it loosening its grip as it cringed away from the
light and warmth. Wriggling and flailing, it unraveled itself from
their bodies, and they were able to pull free.

    "Lucky you pay attention in Herbology, Hermione," said Harry
as he joined her by the wall, wiping sweat off his face.

    "Yeah," said Ron, "and lucky Harry doesn't lose his head in a
crisis -- 'there's no wood,' honestly."

    "This way," said Harry, pointing down a stone passageway,
which was the only way forward.

    All they could hear apart from their footsteps was the gentle
drip of water trickling down the walls. The passageway sloped
downward, and Harry was reminded of Gringotts. With an unpleasant
jolt of the heart, he remembered the dragons said to be guarding
vaults in the wizards' bank. If they met a dragon, a fully-grown
dragon -- Norbert had been bad enough...

    "Can you hear something?" Ron whispered.

    Harry listened. A soft rustling and clinking seemed to be coming
from up ahead.

    "Do you think it's a ghost?"

    "I don't know... sounds like wings to me."

    "There's light ahead -- I can see something moving."

    They reached the end of the passageway and saw before them a
brilliantly lit chamber, its ceiling arching high above them. It
was full of small, jewel-bright birds, fluttering and tumbling all
around the room. On the opposite side of the chamber was a heavy
wooden door.

    "Do you think they'll attack us if we cross the room?" said Ron.

    "Probably," said Harry. "They don't look very vicious, but I
suppose if they all swooped down at once... well, there's no other
choice... I'll run."

    He took a deep breath, covered his face with his arms, and
sprinted across the room. He expected to feel sharp beaks and claws
tearing at him any second, but nothing happened. He reached the
door untouched. He pulled the handle, but it was locked.

    The other two followed him. They tugged and heaved at the door,
but it wouldn't budge, not even when Hermione tried her Alohomora
charm.

    "Now what?" said Ron.

    "These birds... they can't be here just for decoration,"
said Hermione.

    They watched the birds soaring overhead, glittering --
glittering?

    "They're not birds!" Harry said suddenly. "They're keys! Winged
keys -- look carefully. So that must mean..." he looked around
the chamber while the other two squinted up at the flock of
keys. "... yes -- look! Broomsticks! We've got to catch the key to
the door!"

    "But there are hundreds of them!"

    Ron examined the lock on the door.

    "We're looking for a big, old-fashioned one -- probably silver,
like the handle."

    They each seized a broomstick and kicked off into the air,
soaring into the midst of the cloud of keys. They grabbed and
snatched, but the bewitched keys darted and dived so quickly it
was almost impossible to catch one.

    Not for nothing, though, was Harry the youngest Seeker
in a century. He had a knack for spotting things other people
didn't. After a minute's weaving about through the whirl of rainbow
feathers, he noticed a large silver key that had a bent wing, as
if it had already been caught and stuffed roughly into the keyhole.

    "That one!" he called to the others. "That big one -- there --
no, there -- with bright blue wings -- the feathers are all crumpled
on one side."

    Ron went speeding in the direction that Harry was pointing,
crashed into the ceiling, and nearly fell off his broom.

    "We've got to close in on it!" Harry called, not taking his
eyes off the key with the damaged wing. "Ron, you come at it from
above -- Hermione, stay below and stop it from going down and I'll
try and catch it. Right, NOW!"

    Ron dived, Hermione rocketed upward, the key dodged them both,
and Harry streaked after it; it sped toward the wall, Harry leaned
forward and with a nasty, crunching noise, pinned it against the
stone with one hand. Ron and Hermione's cheers echoed around the
high chamber.

    They landed quickly, and Harry ran to the door, the key
struggling in his hand. He rammed it into the lock and turned --
it worked. The moment the lock had clicked open, the key took flight
again, looking very battered now that it had been caught twice.

    "Ready?" Harry asked the other two, his hand on the door
handle. They nodded. He pulled the door open.

    The next chamber was so dark they couldn't see anything at
all. But as they stepped into it, light suddenly flooded the room
to reveal an astonishing sight.

    They were standing on the edge of a huge chessboard, behind the
black chessmen, which were all taller than they were and carved from
what looked like black stone. Facing them, way across the chamber,
were the white pieces. Harry, Ron and Hermione shivered slightly --
the towering white chessmen had no faces.

    "Now what do we do?" Harry whispered.

    "It's obvious, isn't it?" said Ron. "We've got to play our way
across the room."

    Behind the white pieces they could see another door.

    "How?" said Hermione nervously.

    "I think," said Ron, "we're going to have to be chessmen."

    He walked up to a black knight and put his hand out to touch
the knight's horse. At once, the stone sprang to life. The horse
pawed the ground and the knight turned his helmeted head to look
down at Ron.

    "Do we -- er -- have to join you to get across?" The black
knight nodded. Ron turned to the other two.

    "This needs thinking about	he said. I suppose we've got to
take the place of three of the black pieces...."

    Harry and Hermione stayed quiet, watching Ron think. Finally
he said, "Now, don't be offended or anything, but neither of you
are that good at chess --"

    "We're not offended," said Harry quickly. "Just tell us what
to do."

    "Well, Harry, you take the place of that bishop, and Hermione,
YOU 90 next to him instead of that castle."

    "What about you?"

    "I'm going to be a knight," said Ron.

    The chessmen seemed to have been listening, because at these
words a knight, a bishop, and a castle turned their backs on the
white pieces and walked off the board, leaving three empty squares
that Harry, Ron, and Hermione took.

    "White always plays first in chess," said Ron, peering across
the board. "Yes... look..."

    A white pawn had moved forward two squares.

    Ron started to direct the black pieces. They moved silently
wherever he sent them. Harry's knees were trembling. What if
they lost?

    "Harry -- move diagonally four squares to the right."

    Their first real shock came when their other knight was
taken. The white queen smashed him to the floor and dragged him
off the board, where he lay quite still, facedown.

    "Had to let that happen," said Ron, looking shaken. "Leaves
you free to take that bishop, Hermione, go on."

    Every time one of their men was lost, the white pieces showed
no mercy. Soon there was a huddle of limp black players slumped
along the wall. Twice, Ron only just noticed in time that Harry
and Hermione were in danger. He himself darted around the board,
taking almost as many white pieces as they had lost black ones.

    "We're nearly there," he muttered suddenly. "Let me think let
me think..."

    The white queen turned her blank face toward him.

    "Yes..." said Ron softly, "It's the only way... I've got to
be taken."

    "NOF Harry and Hermione shouted.

    "That's chess!" snapped Ron. "You've got to make some
sacrifices! I take one step forward and she'll take me -- that
leaves you free to checkmate the king, Harry!"

    "But --"

    "Do you want to stop Snape or not?"

    "Ron --"

    "Look, if you don't hurry up, he'll already have the Stone!"

    There was no alternative.

    "Ready?" Ron called, his face pale but determined. "Here I go -
now, don't hang around once you've won."

    He stepped forward, and the white queen pounced. She struck
Ron hard across the head with her stone arm, and he crashed to
the floor - Hermione screamed but stayed on her square - the white
queen dragged Ron to one side. He looked as if he'd been knocked out.

    Shaking, Harry moved three spaces to the left.

    The white king took off his crown and threw it at Harry's
feet. They had won. The chessmen parted and bowed, leaving the door
ahead clear. With one last desperate look back at Ron, Harry and
Hermione charged through the door and up the next passageway.

    "What if he's --?"

    "He'll be all right," said Harry, trying to convince
himself. "What do you reckon's next?"

    "We've had Sprout's, that was the Devil's Snare; Flitwick must've
put charms on the keys; McGonagall transfigured the chessmen to
make them alive; that leaves Quirrell's spell, and Snape's."

    They had reached another door.

    "All right?" Harry whispered.

    "Go on."

    Harry pushed it open.

    A disgusting smell filled their nostrils, making both of them
pull their robes up over their noses. Eyes watering, they saw,
flat on the floor in front of them, a troll even larger than the
one they had tackled, out cold with a bloody lump on its head.

    "I'm glad we didn't have to fight that one," Harry whispered
as they stepped carefully over one of its massive legs. "Come on,
I can't breathe."

    He pulled open the next door, both of them hardly daring to look
at what came next - but there was nothing very frightening in here,
just a table with seven differently shaped bottles standing on it
in a line.

    "Snape's," said Harry. "What do we have to do?"

    They stepped over the threshold, and immediately a fire sprang
up behind them in the doorway. It wasn't ordinary fire either;
it was purple. At the same instant, black flames shot up in the
doorway leading onward. They were trapped.

    "Look!" Hermione seized a roll of paper lying next to the
bottles. Harry looked over her shoulder to read it:

    Danger lies before you, while safety lies behind,

    Two of us will help you, which ever you would find,

    One among us seven will let you move ahead,

    Another will transport the drinker back instead,

    Two among our number hold only nettle wine,

    Three of us are killers, waiting bidden in line.

    Choose, unless you wish to stay here forevermore,

    To help you in your choice, we give you these clues four:

    First, however slyly the poison tries to hide

    You will always find some on nettle wine's left side;

    Second, different are those who stand at either end,

    But if you would move onward, neither is your friend;

    Third, as you see clearly, all are different size,

    Neither dwarf nor giant holds death in their insides;

    Fourth, the second left and the second on the right

    Are twins once you taste them, though different at first sight.

    Hermione let out a great sigh and Harry, amazed, saw that she
was smiling, the very last thing he felt like doing.

    "Brilliant," said Hermione. "This isn't magic -- it's logic --
a puzzle. A lot of the greatest wizards haven't got an ounce of
logic, they'd be stuck in here forever."

    "But so will we, won't we?" "Of course not," said
Hermione. "Everything we need is here on this paper. Seven bottles:
three are poison; two are wine; one will get us safely through the
black fire, and one will get us back through the purple."

    "But how do we know which to drink?"

    "Give me a minute."

    Hermione read the paper several times. Then she walked up and
down the line of bottles, muttering to herself and pointing at
them. At last, she clapped her hands.

    "Got it," she said. "The smallest bottle will get us through
the black fire -- toward the Stone."

    Harry looked at the tiny bottle.

    "There's only enough there for one of us," he said. "That's
hardly one swallow."

    They looked at each other.

    "Which one will get you back through the purple flames?"

    Hermione pointed at a rounded bottle at the right end of
the line.

    "You drink that," said Harry. "No, listen, get back and get
Ron. Grab brooms from the flying- key room, they'll get you out of
the trapdoor and past Fluffy -- go straight to the owlery and send
Hedwig to Dumbledore, we need him. I might be able to hold Snape
off for a while, but I'm no match for him, really."

    "But Harry -- what if You-Know-Who's with him?"

    "Well -- I was lucky once, wasn't I?" said Harry, pointing at
his scar. "I might get lucky again."

    Hermione's lip trembled, and she suddenly dashed at Harry and
threw her arms around him.

    "Hermione!"

    "Harry -- you're a great wizard, you know."

    "I'm not as good as you," said Harry, very embarrassed, as she
let go of him.

    "Me!" said Hermione. "Books! And cleverness! There are more
important things -- friendship and bravery and -- oh Harry --
be careful!"

    "You drink first," said Harry. "You are sure which is which,
aren't you?"

    "Positive," said Hermione. She took a long drink from the round
bottle at the end, and shuddered.

    "It's not poison?" said Harry anxiously.

    "No -- but it's like ice."

    "Quick, go, before it wears off."

    "Good luck -- take care."

    "GO!"

    Hermione turned and walked straight through the purple fire.

    Harry took a deep breath and picked up the smallest bottle. He
turned to face the black flames.

    "Here I come," he said, and he drained the little bottle in
one gulp.

    It was indeed as though ice was flooding his body. He put the
bottle down and walked forward; he braced himself, saw the black
flames licking his body, but couldn't feel them -- for a moment he
could see nothing but dark fire -- then he was on the other side,
in the last chamber.

    There was already someone there -- but it wasn't Snape. It
wasn't even Voldemort.

    CHAPTER SEVENTEEN

    THE MAN WITH TWO FACES

    It was Quirrell.

    "You!" gasped Harry.

    Quirrell smiled. His face wasn't twitching at all.

    "Me," he said calmly. "I wondered whether I'd be meeting you
here, Potter."

    "But I thought -- Snape --"

    "Severus?" Quirrell laughed, and it wasn't his usual quivering
treble, either, but cold and sharp. "Yes, Severus does seem the
type, doesn't he? So useful to have him swooping around like an
overgrown bat. Next to him, who would suspect p-p-poor, st-stuttering
P-Professor Quirrell?"

    Harry couldn't take it in. This couldn't be true, it couldn't.

    "But Snape tried to kill me!"

    "No, no, no. I tried to kill you. Your friend Miss Granger
accidentally knocked me over as she rushed to set fire to Snape at
that Quidditch match. She broke my eye contact with you. Another
few seconds and I'd have got you off that broom. I'd have managed
it before then if Snape hadn't been muttering a countercurse,
trying to save you."

    "Snape was trying to save me?"

    "Of course," said Quirrell coolly. "\Why do you think he wanted
to referee your next match? He was trying to make sure I didn't do
it again. Funny, really... he needn't have bothered. I couldn't do
anything with Dumbledore watching. All the other teachers thought
Snape was trying to stop Gryffindor from winning, he did make
himself unpopular... and what a waste of time, when after all that,
I'm going to kill you tonight."

    Quirrell snapped his fingers. Ropes sprang out of thin air and
wrapped themselves tightly around Harry.

    "You're too nosy to live, Potter. Scurrying around the school
on Halloween like that, for all I knew you'd seen me coming to look
at what was guarding the Stone."

    "You let the troll in?"

    "Certainly. I have a special gift with trolls -- you must have
seen what I did to the one in the chamber back there? Unfortunately,
while everyone else was running around looking for it, Snape, who
already suspected me, went straight to the third floor to head me
off -- and not only did my troll fail to beat you to death, that
three-headed dog didn't even manage to bite Snape's leg off properly.

    "Now, wait quietly, Potter. I need to examine this interesting
mirror.

    It was only then that Harry realized what was standing behind
Quirrell. It was the Mirror of Erised.

    "This mirror is the key to finding the Stone," Quirrell murmured,
tapping his way around the frame. "Trust Dumbledore to come up with
something like this... but he's in London... I'll be far away by
the time he gets back...."

    All Harry could think of doing was to keep Quirrell talking
and stop him from concentrating on the mirror.

    "I saw you and Snape in the forest --" he blurted out.

    "Yes," said Quirrell idly, walking around the mirror to look
at the back. "He was on to me by that time, trying to find out
how far I'd got. He suspected me all along. Tried to frighten me -
as though he could, when I had Lord Voldemort on my side...."

    Quirrell came back out from behind the mirror and stared hungrily
into it.

    "I see the Stone... I'm presenting it to my master... but where
is it?"

    Harry struggled against the ropes binding him, but they didn't
give. He had to keep Quirrell from giving his whole attention to
the mirror.

    "But Snape always seemed to hate me so much."

    "Oh, he does," said Quirrell casually, "heavens, yes. He was
at Hogwarts with your father, didn't you know? They loathed each
other. But he never wanted you dead."

    "But I heard you a few days ago, sobbing -- I thought Snape
was threatening you...."

    For the first time, a spasm of fear flitted across Quirrell's
face.

    "Sometimes," he said, "I find it hard to follow my master's
instructions -- he is a great wizard and I am weak --"

    "You mean he was there in the classroom with you?" Harry gasped.

    "He is with me wherever I go," said Quirrell quietly. "I met him
when I traveled around the world. A foolish young man I was then,
full of ridiculous ideas about good and evil. Lord Voldemort showed
me how wrong I was. There is no good and evil, there is only power,
and those too weak to seek it.... Since then, I have served him
faithfully, although I have let him down many times. He has had to be
very hard on me." Quirrell shivered suddenly. "He does not forgive
mistakes easily. When I failed to steal the stone from Gringotts,
he was most displeased. He punished me... decided he would have to
keep a closer watch on me...."

    Quirrell's voice trailed away. Harry was remembering his trip to
Diagon Alley -how could he have been so stupid? He'd seen Quirrell
there that very day, shaken hands with him in the Leaky Cauldron.

    Quirrell cursed under his breath.

    "I don't understand... is the Stone inside the mirror? Should
I break it?"

    Harry's mind was racing.

    What I want more than anything else in the world at the moment,
he thought, is to find the Stone before Quirrell does. So if I
look in the mirror, I should see myseff finding it -- which means
I'll see where it's hidden! But how can I look without Quirrell
realizing what I'm up to?

    He tried to edge to the left, to get in front of the glass
without Quirrell noticing, but the ropes around his ankles were
too tight: he tripped and fell over. Quirrell ignored him. He was
still talking to himself. "What does this mirror do? How does it
work? Help me, Master!"

    And to Harry's horror, a voice answered, and the voice seemed
to come from Quirrell himself

    "Use the boy... Use the boy..."

    Quirrell rounded on Harry.

    "Yes -- Potter -- come here."

    He clapped his hands once, and the ropes binding Harry fell
off. Harry got slowly to his feet.

    "Come here," Quirrell repeated. "Look in the mirror and tell
me what you see."

    Harry walked toward him.

    I must lie, he thought desperately. I must look and lie about
what I see, that's all.

    Quirrell moved close behind him. Harry breathed in the funny
smell that seemed to come from Quirrell's turban. He closed his eyes,
stepped in front of the mirror, and opened them again.

    He saw his reflection, pale and scared-looking at first. But
a moment later, the reflection smiled at him. It put its hand
into its pocket and pulled out a blood-red stone. It winked and
put the Stone back in its pocket -- and as it did so, Harry felt
something heavy drop into his real pocket. Somehow -- incredibly --
he'd gotten the Stone.

Just one look at him in the Great Hall, and well have the entire school running all the way to Mexico! said Harry excitedly.
Who is Aragog? asked Hermione. She hadnt been with Ron and Harry during their second year at Hogwarts, when they went into the Forbidden Forest, she was too busy being petrified. There, they encountered a giant spider named Aragog, who wanted to eat Harry and Ron.
Yeah, okay. One more question how exactly are we going to get it out of the forest, much less into the school? Hermione asked. Harry and Ron looked at each other, puzzled. Sure, Aragog was the perfect beast for the job, but how would they get him in? Harry yawned over the thought.
Hey Ron, what time is it? 
Um eleven thirty, said Ron, looking at his watch. Just then, an idea came to Harrys mind. He knew how to get Aragog into the school!
Ron, spiders are afraid of basilisks, right? asked Harry slowly.
Yeah so? Its not like we have a pet basilisk anywhere though. 
No, but we do have something else! said Harry as he left a confused Ron and Hermione at the table, and ran back to his room. He grabbed the watched that Dudley had given him and ran back downstairs. Held up his watch for Hermione and Ron to see. His watch was in the shape of a basilisk, the thing that all spiders feared the most. 
All we got to do is put an Engorgio Charm on this watchs face, and then chase them right into the Great Hall! Hermione and Ron looked at him.
Harry, so many things could go wrong- Hermione was cut off by Harry:
So!? This is just a small part of the even more impossible trip Hermione! If you cant stand up to a spider, how are you going to fare against an army of dementors, sucking the happiness out of you? Hermione nodded. This was the only way. Aragog was the closest monster, and this was the only way to bring him in.
So its settled then, said Harry. Before the Halloween Feast, well all meet outside the Forbidden Forest, and chase the giant spider inside the castle. Ron and Hermione nodded in approval. Now, show me the best route to get to Azkaban. Ron and Hermione shook their heads.
Not until you tell us how it went tonight, said Ron, with a smile on his face. Harry put his hands in his pockets, licked his lips, and told them about his date with Cho, with Ron and Hermiones mouth gaping open the entire time.

Chapter 12- Transformation Training
The next day, Harry was anxious to get on with their plan. Even through Halloween was still a few weeks away, Harry couldnt help but think about it, while having the same thing continually cross his mind: how are they going to get in Azkaban? Harry assumed that they wouldnt just be able to walk in, go to Sirius and Lupins cell, and let them go. They had to think of a way to do it. Harry proposed this question to Ron and Hermione during Transfiguration,
So how do you reckon we can do it? he asked them. Hermione stroked her chin thoughtfully, while Ron just stared at him, as though expecting Harry to give him the answer.
Well we could but no. Itd take to long and said Hermione, inspiring interest in Harry and Ron.
Whats your idea Hermione? asked Ron. She sighed, looking as though she wished she hadnt said anything.
Well, said Hermione, we could follow in your dads footsteps Harry. Harrys face lit up.
Of course! said Harry excitedly. We can become Animagi! His father, Lupin, Sirius, and Peter Pettigrew had each become Animagi during their years at Hogwarts. They were each able to transform into an animal.
Yes, but Harry, it takes many months, even years to become one! It took your dad almost his entire time at Hogwarts to become one! said Hermione, trying to take Harry off the idea.
Well, they didnt have proper teachers, or help to do it. All they had was each other and books to learn it, said Harry.
So what are you saying? asked Ron. We enlist the help of a teacher?
Yes Ron, that is what Im saying, said Harry. He looked at Hermione, who now looked excited.
Thats it! Of course! If we get proper help, we could probably become Animagi quickly. We may even have it down in five or six months- she was cut off by Harry.
Five or six month! But we have to do this in- Harry suddenly realized that the entire class was looking at him. He wasnt exactly surprised though, if someone else had been going on as loud as he was, hed be looking at them.
Do you have something to share with the rest of us Mr. Potter? asked Professor McGonagall who was busy transfiguring a fish into a turtle.
Um no professor, said Harry. Professor McGonagall looked at him suspiciously for a second, then retuned to her work, and Harry returned to talking with Ron and Hermione.
But Hermione, we need something that will get us into Azkaban, said Harry, much softer than before.
Well, well just need another plan for that, she said, listening more to Professor McGonagall, and taking many notes. Ron, however, was looking slightly disappointed.
Too bad, for a second there, I thought I might learn to do something that only I, not any of my other brothers, could do. Harry and Hermione looked at him sympathetically.
Well, even if we cant use it to get into Azkaban, it would still be an invaluable technique to have, especially when were all Aurors, said Harry. Rons face brightened up, and Hermione looked at him.
You do realize that this will take months, maybe even years of work and practice, and weve got tests coming up soon and-
No it wont Hermione, said Harry. Not with McGonagall teaching us! All three of them looked up at Professor McGonagall in a new light. 
Well, it might be nice to know more about it, it could help me on the O.W.L.s, said Hermione, trying to hide the fact that she really wanted to do this. 
The rest of the class went by slowly, and Harrys anxiousness to get started was getting higher. By the time the bell actually rang, Harry was gripping the front of his desk, with his eyes bulging out. 
Ah, finally! said Ron, he had been waiting too. When the rest of the class had left, Harry, Ron, and Hermione headed up to Professor McGonagall who was busy grading some papers.
Um, professor stuttered Harry. He hadnt thought about how he was going to start this conversation.
Yes Mr. Potter? asked Professor McGonagall. She peered up at him through her half-circle glasses that were on the tip of her nose. 
Well, we that is me, Ron, and Hermione have been wondering if well you could train us to well.
Become Animagi, Mr. Potter? she asked, not looking at him, but putting grades on papers. Harrys jaw dropped, how had she known that? Could she read minds? Harry had suspected for a while that many of the teachers here were able to do that, but hed never suspected Professor McGonagall until now.
Yes, thats it. How did you know? he asked, feeling relieved that he wouldnt be the one to bring it up. She took her glasses of, set them on the table, and then rubbed her eyes.
I expected that youd be paying more attention to your godfathers trial Harry, she said. to defend himself, he admitted to being and Animagus, and Lupin backed him up saying that he, Peter, and James had each become one. She put her glasses back on. I knew, eventually, that youd be coming to ask me. The urge to be an Animagus has been passed down to you from your father, who got it form his father, who got it from his.
You mean, my grandfather, and my great-grandfather have all been Animagi? asked Harry, dumbfounded that he never knew this. However, he had never known anything about any of his family past his mother and father, except for those currently in the Order of the Phoenix. 
Yes Harry, said Professor McGonagall, she put her glasses back on, It was only a matter of time before the urge overcame you. As for you two though (she pointed to Ron and Hermione) I did not expect you at all. I am assuming that you are following Mr. Potter?
Yes, I thought it could help me for the O.W.L.s, said Hermione.
And I thought itd be great to be able to do something my brothers, or my sister, couldnt, said Ron. Professor McGonagall, however, looked furious at them.
Becoming an Animagus is not something to be taken lightly you two! she scolded Ron and Hermione. It should not be utilized to help you pass a test, or to show off! It is magic at its finest, its most difficult! It is not to be taken lightly at all! she glared at them both, Hermione looked shocked, she was rarely ever talked to harshly, much less scolded, by a teacher. Ron, however, was used to this sort of thing, and looked unaffected. 
Well, professor, I think it would help me a lot to have some others work on this project along with me, said Harry, trying to save Ron and Hermione. McGonagall appeared to have accepted that.
Yes, I suppose it would help you, Potter. Having two others to help you along would be very valuable. Yes, that is a good idea, she said to all three of them. Meet me here at seven tonight, we will begin your training. It will be long and vigorous work, and if any of you want to drop out of it, I will not be surprised. Many wizards, while extremely wise in one or more other areas, are unable to become Animagi.
We know professor, but we wont give up, said Harry. Professor McGonagall looked pleased
Alright then, dont be late! Now go, Ive got another class coming in! she shooed them off as her new class filed their way inside. Harry saw that they were the Slytherins. Hoping to leave before Malfoy came in, Harry sprinted out the door. Unfortunately, he crashed into someone. 
Watch it Potter! Youre like a brick only the brick has more brains, said Malfoy after Harry bumped into him.
Move it Malfoy, said Harry disdainfully.
What are you doing, staying late Potter? Catching up on some work? Begging McGonagall to give you a better grade?
Sorry Malfoy, already got good grades. I didnt get this prefect badge by buying one with money from my rich father, said Harry as he slid past Malfoy, and to his next class.
Harry walked triumphantly to Defense Against the Dark Arts with Ron and Hermione, each looking forward to their Animagus lessons. The class started going by quickly, with everyone finishing up perfecting their shield spells. By the middle of class, Harry could produce a shield that deflected all the hexes that Mrs. Figg tested on them. Once each of them had been tested and passed, she made an announcement.
Everyone, I have an announcement about your learning schedule. All the students in the class looked at her with interest. I know that were supposed to be moving on to more advanced shields now, but Dumbledore had just informed me that he wants to go a bit more ahead. Now everyone in the class was gazing right at Mrs. Figg, wondering what they were going to do next.
How many of you have ever felt extreme pain? she asked the class. Everyone started at her confusedly, but a few people put their hands in the air, in fact, almost everyone did, including Harry. He had his bones grown overnight, had his scar burn, and been hit by the Cruciatus Curse twice. 
Now, among you that have your hand up, how man have felt pain so extreme that you wanted it to all just end, just to die? Everyone was looking at her very seriously now, and everyone that had their hand up, put it down except for Harry. Mrs. Figg looked at him.
Mr. Potter, you are the only one in this class this entire school perhaps who can answer this question. What was it like to have the Cruciatus Curse put on you? Now all the eyes shifted to Harry. He was feeling very nervous. He had tried to block those memories out of his mind and now that they were flooding back, Harry felt like he was being put through the curse all over again.
Well, it felt like felt like I guess its like when you break a leg, only breaking every part of your body at once, Harry stopped there, thinking he was done, but, he felt as though this didnt show how bad the curse was, so he continued. And then having hot pokers put all over you, and being jabbed with spears, and then being slit open with a dagger and having your intestines fall out, and then having them tied to a pole, and that thats only the beginning Harry now stopped, with everyone gawking at him, including Hermione and Ron. He had never told them how bad the curse really was. Even Mrs. Figg was looking at him in surprise,
Well, Harry. What I am trying to get at is, wouldnt you have liked to be able to shut off the flow of pain to your head? Harry started at her, this question had a very obvious answer. 
Well, yeah, said Harry.
Of course you would! It would have helped you greatly! Mrs. Figg slammed her fist on the desk loudly. Come on Harry, you can give me more of an answer than yeah. To be able to turn off the pain wouldve been a godsend. Harry could only nod in response, it was only too true. 
And thats what Im going to teach you all to do, said Mrs. Figg. Each student was looking at her appreciatively, as though they never wanted to go through what Harry had. Under the certain current circumstances Dumbledore has thought it important to start teaching you all how to do this. It will require much patience and skill, it takes as much intelligence to do this as it does to become an Animagus she said and looked at Harry. Did she know Harry was trying to become one? Well, Harry didnt care. He knew what these circumstances were Voldemort rising. Harry would be more than happy to learn this skill. 
We will start today, and hopefully, by the end of the term, you will all be able to voluntarily shut off pain, Mrs. Figg said to the class. Each looked more ready than ever to begin. To start off, I want each of you to come up, and get a PainBall. We will start with these first then move on to more advanced techniques. Harry looked around the class, Neville was whiter than a ghost, he must have been very afraid. Suddenly, he put up his hand.
Yes Mr. Longbottom? asked Mrs. Figg.
Um youre not going to put the Cruciatus Curse on us are you? he looked absolutely terrified. Harry knew that both of Nevilles parents were tortured with the Cruciatus Curse, and were now in an insane asylum because it had messed up their brains so much. Mrs. Figg looked at him sympathetically, she, along with almost the rest of the wizarding world.
No Neville, of course not. That curse is illegal to use on humans, and I dont feel like spending the rest of my life in Azkaban. Neville looked slightly relieved, though his face was still white. Anyway, I want you all to come up and get a PainBall. It will give you a little stinging shock that you will eventually learn to not feel. Come on, come up! The class started to come up slowly, and reached into the a box that contained the PainBalls. 
Harry was the first in line, and looked in the box. It was filled with about twenty small transparent spheres. Each sphere had a dark cloud in the center that was constantly growing and shrinking. Harry bravely put his hand in, and gripped one of the balls. The second he touched it, he felt as though he was stung by a bee in his hand. He quickly receded his hand from the box, wobbling it vigorously, trying to shake the pain off.
Ow! was all that Harry could say. Mrs. Figg glared at him.
Harry! If you could endure the Cruciatus Curse, how come you think this small little PainBall is so bad? 
Well, its just that I guess I didnt think that-
Exactly! said Mrs. Figg. You didnt think! I will teach you all how to think, how to control your mind, and shut off pain! Harry, this time, when you reach in, and grasp a PainBall, try to concentrate on something else besides the pain. Harry nodded, somewhat understanding. He reached in again, and just when his hand was about to grasp the ball, he thought of his Quidditch victory against Hufflepuff. How happy everyone was, how happy he was. Then he thought of his date with Cho, and the complete bliss that flowed through his body the entire time he was there. Harry smiled
Harry! You did it, excellent job! said Mrs. Figg. Harry suddenly came out of his catatonic phase, and looked at his hand. He was holding the PainBall, and he didnt even feel it. However, just as he thought that he was feeling nothing, a sudden stinging pain was sent through his arm. 
Arg! yelled Harry as he dropped the ball, and rubbed his arm. 
Very good Harry, very good for your first time. I will soon teach you how to transform those happy thoughts into a pain shield that will slow all around and through you. You will be able to stop any and all pain, even when realizing you are being hurt. Now, I want the rest of you coming up and trying to do like Harry. 
The rest of the class came up to the box, and took a PainBall. Some of them dropped it immediately, like Harry did at first. Ron and Hermione, however, held theirs for a while. Harry wondered what happy memories they were focusing on.
When class ended, Harry, Ron, and Hermione were able to prevent pain for little less than a minute, and the rest of the class could prevent from dropping the ball for a few seconds. The bell rang, and their school day was over. Harry, Ron, and Hermiones learning, however, was only just beginning. After doing their homework in the Gryffindor common room, and just playing around for a few hours, they all walked down to Professor McGonagalls office, ready for their first Animagus lesson.
As they walked in, they saw Professor McGonagall. They also saw something, or rather someone, that they did not expect to see there. Harry, Ron, and Hermiones jaws dropped all the way to the floor. 
It was Draco Malfoy.
Hello Potter. So, what kind of animal are you going to be, a bunny? A piglet? He smiled at all three of them as they walked in, and stood next to Professor McGonagall who appeared to be busy at the moment. Harry took this opportunity to interrogate Malfoy.
What are you doing here!? whispered Harry, venomously. Malfoy curled a smile.
Well, I asked McGonagall what you were doing, staying after class. She said nothing, but then I snuck a peek at her schedule, and saw here write: Animagus Lessons: Potter, Weasley, Granger. So, I asked her what those were about, and asked if I could take the class as well. She looked positively terrified that I knew about the lessons, and just said, Okay, meet me here at seven. So, here I am! Harry and Malfoy glared at each other.
I know youre just doing this so that you can try and be better than me Malfoy, said Harry.
I know you just wanted to becomes an Animagus to one up me, Potter, responded Malfoy. By now, Professor McGonagall had finished her work, and stood up. She looked up at the four of them (more or less glared at Malfoy), and spoke.
Tonight, we will begin your training as Animagi. This will be very tough training, some wizards think it is not worth the trouble of learning. However, I hope you all will stay with it as it will benefit you in the end, by far worth all the trouble.
The most difficult part of Animagus transformation is the fact that you cannot use a wand. A wand does not enhance your magic power, however, as is commonly thought. It centralizes your magic. It takes the magical power that is spread throughout your body and puts it all into one area, letting you do more complex magic.
To do a transformation, you must concentrate on each magical cell in your body individually, and force that one small area to transform, part by part. Your first few transformation will be very err choppy. But, eventually, youll be able to centralize your magical cells yourself, instead of piece by piece, and transform smoothly, though this may take months even years to master. Are there any questions before we begin? asked Professor McGonagall. Malfoy, surprisingly, raised his hand.
Yes Mr. Malfoy?
Why cant one use a wand when performing an Animagus transformation? he asked. Professor McGonagall started at him in surprise.
Well, I thought that would be obvious Mr. Malfoy. Using a wand to perform an Animagus transformation totally defeats the purpose of transforming in this manner. Being an Animagus will help you when you have no wand, or are otherwise handicapped. Now then, are all of you ready to begin? The four of them nodded.
All right then, began Professor McGonagall, to start, have any of you ever changed parts of your body without the use of a wand? Harry, Ron, Hermione, and Malfoy each raised their hand. 
Mr. Potter? What have you done? Harry remembered, from his childhood, that whenever the Dursleys gave him a haircut, they could cut off as much as they wanted but, no matter what, the next day, he would have a bushy head of hair again. 
Well when I was little, I made my hair grow back when my Aunt and uncle cut it. said Harry. Professor McGonagall nodded in approval.
And you, Mr. Weasley?
Well once, my brother, George, hid my favorite teddy be- err toy on the highest shelf in our room. I could almost reach it, but I was just a few inches away. So my hand it just grew a little I guess. George was freaked out afterwards. Professor McGonagall, once again, nodded with approval, as if testing them to see if they were worthy.
Now what about you Miss. Granger? Hermione blushed a little before she spoke:
Um this Summer, while I was at Viktor Krums mansion, we were both on his couch and he leaned over to- well. I leaned over to him and all of a sudden my teeth, they grew larger and larger, at least three times their usual size. I eventually did get them back to normal after a while. Professor McGonagall once again nodded, though not as much as before. She made up her lack of blushing, however, with a small smile. 
What about you Mr. Malfoy? asked Professor McGonagall.
Well, I havent ever actually done anything on accident, Professor, but I can do this, Malfoy put out his hand, stretching his fingers. He closed his eyes, and at first, Harry thought he was imagining it, but Malfoys fingernails started to grow. At first it was slow, but then there was a recognizable difference, especially when mayflys fingernails were three inches long.
Then, just when Harry thought they couldnt get any longer, Malfoys fingernails shrank back to their original size. He put his hand back down by his side, and then opened his eyes, looking especially proud. Harry knew Malfoy had been practicing earlier, he obviously didnt want to tell the three of them any embarrassing childhood stories about him transforming himself, he wanted to be a step ahead, and be able to do it then and there.
Excellent work Mr. Malfoy, said Professor McGonagall, looking quite shocked. I have never seen a student so young be able to perform such an expert transformation so quickly. I think we can expect excellent things from you maybe even our first Polymagus 
Whats a Polymagus? Harry whispered to Hermione. She was looking pale, and even a little scared.
What? Oh! A Polymagus thats a wizard that can transform into many different animals, or one combination of many different animals, not just one like an Animagus, she whispered angrily back to Harry, whose mind was perplexed. I cant believe hed be able to do something that I cant! How could Malfoy be able to do something so difficult? He had never shown any particular talent in any area, much less transfiguration.
Now, onto practice! Mr. Malfoy has already taken this step, but on a different part of the body than I usually start with. I prefer to start with your fingers. For the next few days, we will try and perfect growing and shrinking them.
To do this, you will have to concentrate hard. Look at your hands, remember them, memorize every detail: every wrinkle, scar, mark, and cut. Harry looked at his hand, and tried to take in every bit of it. He started at the end of his wrists, and worked his way up to the tips of his fingernails. 
Now, close your eyes, and try to see your hands only now with longer fingers. Concentrate hard. Harry closed his eyes, and formed a picture of his hand in his head. He pictured his fingers longer than they were, this new longer-fingered hand of his looked very odd. 
Now, open your eyes! said Professor McGonagall. Harry opened his eyes, and to his (and apparently Ron, and Hermiones whose hands had done the same) shock, saw his fingers longer than they were by about two inches. Not as long as he had pictured them, but still quite long. Malfoy, however, looked lazily at his longer fingers. He appeared anxious to go beyond this basic step, and onto the more complicated stuff. 
Close your eyes everyone, and picture your hands as they are now. Morph the fingers in your mind, make them back to their original length. After you do, open your eyes. Harry did this, and, sure, enough, when he opened his eyes, his fingers were back to their normal size. Malfoy gave a very fake expression of surprise, slapping his hands against his cheeks, and bugging his eyes out. 
Excellent everyone, excellent! Now, if my watch is correct, it is eight o clock, and time for you all to be in your common rooms. We will do this again tomorrow, same place, bright and early. Harry, Ron, and Hermione all walked out together, talking excitedly.
Oh, and, start thinking of what kind of animal you will transform into! It is the most important decision you will make as an Animagus! said Professor McGonagall as they left. Malfoy slipped away from them quickly. Harry thought this odd, why wasnt he making fun of he, Ron, and Hermione for being behind him? Harry shrugged it off, and saw it as a good sign. 
Wow, I cant wait until we can actually become animals! said Ron.
It wasnt as hard as I thought, said Hermione excitedly. We may be able to becomes Animagi sooner than I thought!
Yeah, well, Malfoy will be one before any of us at the rate hes going anyway. With his skill and all said Harry grumpily. He was not used to Malfoy being better than him.
Before they new it, they arrived at the Gryffindor common room, and went in. Since no one was around, and they were tired from their Animagus class, they all decided to go to sleep. As Harry got ready for bed, he started thinking of what animal he was going to transform into. He took out his Care of Magical Creatures Book, and looked through it. A bird maybe? A snake? A dragon even? The possibilities were endless. 
Harry decided to sleep on it, and flopped down on his bed. When his head hit his pillow, he felt something on his pillow. Harry sat up, and looked to see what it was. It was another piece of parchment. It read:
I know what you did Harry Potter, I know what you did unless you want to be in trouble, I suggest to undo your wrong

Chapter 13- Animals
Harry couldnt sleep all that night. He was awake, thinking about, and looking at the note. Who sent it? How much did they know? What were they going to do to him? Finally, at around three o clock in the morning, he decided he would tell Ron and Hermione. After all, they already knew about the Order of the Phoenix, he might as well tell them this too. They might be able to help him. 
So finally, at around six in the morning, when breakfast was just being served, Harry got up from bed, got dressed, and went downstairs. He was the only one there for quite a while. Then at around seven, people started coming down. Among them were Ron and Hermione.
Wha- wha- what are you doing down here so early Harry? yawned Ron. Its the weekend sleep in.
Oh, I couldnt sleep, said Harry. Ron and Hermione sat down on either side of him and started on their breakfast. 
Why couldnt you sleep? asked Ron, eating some eggs. 
Because of this, said Harry, slapping the note onto the table. Ron and Hermione lazily looked at the note, not expecting much. However, once they realized what the note said, Ron dropped his fork, and Hermione choked on her waffle. 
What? What do they mean Harry? asked Hermione after she drank some juice, recovering from her choking incident. 
Well, I have a theory about what its on started Harry. He still hadnt told them that he had stolen Fawkes, and was planning on not telling them. But, now, it appeared he had no choice. He told them about how he and Mrs. Figg had sneaked into Dumbledores office, he had copied Fawkes, and then taken the original. Then how they snuck out, while Harry saw Tci down the hall. 
Well, why dont you ask Tci about it? asked Hermione.
I did, he said he didnt know anything about it! responded Harry. 
Well, there must have been someone else there that saw you, said Ron.
Yeah, but, how can I find out who? asked Harry.
I know! said Hermione. Give it to Professor Flitwick, and then he can perform a Grapholo Charm to see who wrote it and- her excited speech was cut off by Harry,
Hermione! I cant show this to a teacher! Theyll ask who I think I got it from, and why I think I got it, and then theyll know I stole Fawkes! 
Well then I dont know what you should do Harry. Except of course! Go to Mrs. Figg! Harry was in shock and surprise that he hadnt thought of that. Arabella was the only adult that Harry could talk to about this problem, except for Sirius and Lupin, of course, but they were in Azkaban.
Excellent idea Hermione! Ill go to her right now! Harry shoved the last bit of his muffin into his mouth, and then dashed out of the Great Hall, and to Mrs. Figgs office. He arrived there soon, and entered. Mrs. Figg was sitting at her desk, grading some papers. The PainBalls from his last class were in a box next to her on the desk. 
What is it Harry? asked Mrs. Figg. She immediately looked up at him. He reached into his pocket, and took out the note.
I think someone knows we stole Fawkes, Arabella, said Harry plainly. Mrs. Figg sat up, and walked over to him, becoming paler with each step. When she arrived at Harry, she looked like Nearly Headless Nick. 
Wha- what do you mean Harry? How could how? she stuttered. Harry just offered her the note, and she grabbed it from his hand. She glanced over it quickly and handed it back to Harry, looking positively terrified. 
I got another one just like it a few days ago, after I won the Quidditch match, said Harry, just adding to the terror on Arabellas face.
Do you think you know who- who wrote this Harry? asked Arabella. 
Well, when we left Dumbledores office that night we stole Fawkes, I saw Tci in the hallway.
Did you ask him about it yet? asked Mrs. Figg.
Yeah, he said he didnt know anything about it, said Harry. Mrs. Figg contorted her face into an expression of non-belief. And well I believe him.
Well, wed like to believe him Harry, but as for now, he is our only suspect, and we must treat him as such.
Cant you just do a oh whats it called? A Grapholo Charm on the note to see who wrote it? asked Harry. Mrs. Figg gave him a smile, and a weak laugh. 
Harry, the Grapholo Charm is one of the hardest charms there is. The only way I could do it is to learn it from Professor Flitwick, who would want to know my reasons behind learning it. Im sorry Harry. That would be a nice solution, but it is an impossible one as well.
Well, what should we do then?
Just stay on the lookout Harry. If you get any more notes like these, show it to me. I dont know if this person is serious about his threats, though. He would obviously want something in return for him not telling, and he hasnt made any demands yet. So yes, Harry, just be on guard and keep an eye on Tci.
Alright professor, said Harry, walking out the door. 
Arabella, Harry! Arabella! Youre not in class! yelled Mrs. Figg as Harry ran out, and back to the great hall. He caught Ron and Hermione just before they were about to leave, and he walked back to the common room with them, telling them what Mrs. Figg had said.
So she reckons Tci did it, eh? said Ron.
Yeah, but I dont know. He just doesnt seem like that type of person, said Hermione.
Oh Hermione! said Ron. You just like him because hes handsome! You know, with his special Durmstrang training thing. Yeah, give me a break! Hes in Slytherin after all! This is just the kind of thing one of them would do!
Well, he did say he wanted to be in Gryffindor, and he seemed pretty devastated when he found out he was in Slytherin, said Harry, turning the conversation to Tcis favor. 
Yeah, well we gotta go to Animagus class you guys, said Ron, changing the subject. However, he was right. They were supposed to meet Professor McGonagall early today, so they could spend the entire day practicing. The three of them walked to their Transfiguration classroom, and met Professor McGonagall there, already talking with Malfoy.
-so I was thinking maybe a dragon, or a hydra of some sort. A powerful, magical beast! said Malfoy to McGonagall.
Well, with some practice, you may be able to do all of those Malfoy! said Professor McGonagall, smiling. It was sickening, a teacher praising Malfoy. Harry shuddered at the sight. He pushed the door fully open, and the three of them walked in.
Hello you three! I was just helping Mr. Malfoy here decide which animal to transform into. Have you been thinking about it? asked Professor McGonagall to them. Each of them nodded. Harry wondered which animals Hormone and Ron were thinking of utilizing. 
Excellent, excellent. I hope each of you have a good idea in mind, because that is what were are going to be doing today, researching animals! said Professor McGonagall. Hermione smiled excitedly, but Harry and Ron rolled their eyes and sighed. They wanted to get on with transformation, not do research.
Now, I now you all want to get on with transformation practice, said Professor McGonagall. Wow, could she read minds? Harry thought, but you need to decide which animal you will be copying before we go any further. So, hit the books! she pointed to a large stack of books in the corner of the room that reached the ceiling. The three of them walked over, picked out a book (except for Hermione, who took five) and then walked back to a table, and opened them up. Malfoy walked over to the stack of books after Harry, Ron, and Hermione were settled in at a table. He grabbed a particularly large black book, and returned to his secluded table in the corner. 
As Harry looked through the book (A Guide To Almost All Animals), he saw many creatures hed never even knew existed before. There were dragons, snakes, and lions, but there were also things called Zyrexes, metallic humanoids with blades for arms that inhabited pyramids. There were also Mylins, small turtle-like beings that had wings, and four eyes. There were uncountable others, as Harry saw while looking through the book for hours on end. 
By the time Harry reached the last few pages, he had his heart set on a dragon. It would be big, powerful, and fast. However, when Harry turned to the next page, a different animal caught his eye: a gryffin. It looked exactly like a lion, except for wings that came out of its shoulders. At first, he thought it was a spelling error in the book. He had heard of griffins before, but never gryffins. He looked at the index in the back and, sure enough, they were two separate beasts.
A gryffin would be perfect, thought Harry, turning back to its page. It would still be powerful and fast, only more compact, and more inconspicuous. The more Harry thought about it, the more he knew that he must transform into a gryffin. It was as if voices were calling him to do it. 
Harry flipped through the rest of the pages without really looking at the animals, he needed to be a gryffin. He felt as though all other animals were inferior to it, and that he would only be happy when he would be able to become one. Harry looked around, and it appeared as though Ron and Hermione had made their choice. Each of them had a slight smile, and had notes written down on parchment with most of the names crossed off, and only one or two left.
Then, after five straight hours of doing nothing but looking through books, Professor McGonagall spoke.
It is now two o clock in the afternoon, and I do not wish to keep you here all day. I hope you have had time to thoroughly research your animal. I want you all to practice making your fingers grow and shrink today ant tomorrow. I also want you all to make a decisive decision on which animal you will be copying, and get a piece of it. Fur, hair, teeth, anything will do. Try to get it by our next class, which will be on Monday, at seven o clock in the evening. Until then, good-bye and good-luck! The four of them filed out of the room.
So, what did you decide on Harry? asked Hermione.
A gryffin, said Harry strongly. Ron and Hermiones eyes widened.
Really? Wow, thats cool Harry, said Ron. 
I thought thats what you might choose, said Hermione. After all, gryffins are in your blood. Ron and Harry stared at her in question.
What do you mean Hermione? asked Harry.
Dont you know the animal of your own house Harry? asked Hermione.
Uh, yeah. A lion, responded Harry, a little annoyed. Hermione sighed.
Harry, havent you ever even glanced at Hogwarts, A History?
Nope, said Harry and Ron together.
Well, people think the mascot for Gryffindor is a lion, but thats just because of a mistake. Back when Hogwarts was new, the four founders hired a Muggle artist to paint the banner since wizards were terrible at art.
When the artist got to the Gryffindor animal on the banner, he thought there was a mistake in the sketch that was given to him. A lion? With wings? Impossible, he thought. So, he painted just a lion instead of a gryffin. By the time he was done, though, Godric Gryffindor had died, and no one knew that he had wanted a gryffin instead of a lion. The original sketches for the banner were discovered just a while ago, and thats when people discovered the truth, though not many cared. They were used to the lion, and its just stayed that way.
And what does all that have to do with me? asked Harry. Hermione gave a deep sigh.
Harry! Isnt it obvious! Youre the heir of Gryffindor, remember?
What? How could I be that? asked Harry, amazed.
Oh come on, sighed Hermione. Red and gold sparks shot out of your wand the first time you used it, you pulled Godric Gryffindors sword out of its sheath. Harry, all signs point to heir of Gryffindor.
Yeah I guess youre right, said Harry, feeling proud of himself.
As usual murmured Ron, Hermione glared at him.
But then, why didnt my dad choose a gryffin for his animal instead of a stag? asked Harry thoughtfully. Hermione looked puzzled.
Well um I dont know. Maybe-
Ha! For once, Hermione does not know the answer! said Ron happily as he started skipping and jumping. 
Well, what animal did you choose Hermione? asked Harry. 
Oh, me? I chose a unicorn, said Hermione. Even though its a magical creature, and will require a little more work to learn to transform into, I think its worth it.
But what about gryffins, Hermione? Arent they magical? asked Harry.
No, sorry Harry, theyre not.
But, they can fly and-
Harry, said Hermione stiffly, if a creature can fly, that doesnt mean its magical. To be magical, a creature must have one special property: it can be used in a potion, and theres not one single potion in the world that requires anything from a gryffin.
Well, I guess its a good thing that its not magical. It can do a lot, fly and bite, and it wont require any extra effort to become, said Harry, looking happy. He called down to Ron who was about twenty feet ahead of them, still skipping along merrily. 
Hey Ron! yelled Harry. Ron turned around.
What? he asked as he started to come back.
You havent told us yet, what animal did you pick? asked Harry.
Oh, me? I chose an chameleon, said Ron.
An chameleon? asked Hermione surprised. Whyd you pick that?
Well, it just seemed like it was calling to me I suppose said Ron.
Really? said Harry. Me too. I saw the gryffin and it was like telling me to pick it. There was like a voice in the back of my mind.
Me too, said Hermione looking excited. I guess this proves that the animal chooses the Animagus, and that the Animagus does not choose the animal.
I wonder what animal was calling to Malfoy? said Harry. Hermione and Ron stared at him.
Well, well find out soon, when he brings a piece of it in, said Hermione.
Oh yeah! That reminds me, where am I going to get a hair or something from a gryffin? asked Harry. Hermione and Ron nodded.
Well all need help getting a piece of our creature, said Hermione. But how?
I know! said Ron. Hagrid! Hell probably know where a million gryffins are! Harry and Hermione nodded in agreement.
Lets go see him now, said Harry. They all headed out of the castle, and to Hagrids house on the grounds. As they were heading to the door, they passed the potions classroom and saw Malfoy talking to Professor Fletcher. They were both talking excitedly. Harry shrugged it off, potions was Malfoys best class, even though Snape wasnt around to give him automatic good grades anymore. He was probably trying to do some extra credit or something.
They soon reached Hagrids house, and knocked on the door. They heard Hagrids dog, Fang, bark loudly, but they didnt hear Hagrid coming to the door. Harry opened the door slowly to peek inside, no one was there. Just then, Harry felt Hermione tug on his shirt.
Oh! Harry! Look! she said. Harry turned around, and saw a unicorn. It was the most beautiful animal Harry had ever seen. It was pure-white, with a silvery mane going from the top of its head all the way down its back, and ending in a perfectly white tail. On top of its head there was a single, clear horn that looked as though it were made of crystal. It merely looked at the three of them, as if asking them to come over.
Lets see if we can get a piece of its hair, said Ron.
Why? asked Hermione, looking angry.
Because you need one to be able to transform into it, replied Ron. 
Oh, thats right. Im sorry Ron, said Hermione.
Cmon, lets go over! said Harry. They slowly crept towards it, trying to be quiet, but also trying not to look to intimidating. They didnt want it to run away. After what seemed like a long time, they eventually reached the unicorn. Since they are more friendly to girls than boys, Hermione put one of her hands out, and stroked the unicorns mane. It made a noise, but not a neigh like a horse, it was more like a song of a whale. It was long and beautiful.
Thats a good unicorn, said Hermione soothingly as she stroked it. Harry, hand me my wand. Harry reached into Hermiones pocket, and pulled out her wand. He handed it to her, and she brought it up to the mane of the unicorn where she had been stroking it.
Shearus, said Hermione quietly. A tiny pair of scissors popped out of the tip of her wand. But, just s they came out, the suns light reflected off of it, and into the unicorns eyes. It made a noise that wasnt as pleasant as the song before, and it ran into the forest. 
Oh no! Im sorry unicorn! Come back! yelled Hermione. Come on Harry! Lets follow it! Hermione ran after the unicorn, and into the dark forest. Harry and Ron started after her.
Come back unicorn! Come back! yelled Hermione as they were running, even though it would obviously do her no good. She ran faster and faster after it, and Harry and Ron just tried to follow her, though she was getting ahead of them very quickly.
Wait up Hermione! yelled Ron, panting. They had been sprinting for several minutes now, and were getting deeper and deeper into the forest. It was getting very dark all around them. 
Lets stop for a minute, said Ron, ending his pursuit. Harry stopped with him, though he wasnt nearly as winded as Ron appeared to be since he had been running and was used to it. Suddenly, they heard Hermione scream, as though from far away.
Hermione! yelled Harry and Ron. They both started running again, toward where they heard the voice. 
Oh, what couldve happened to her? asked Ron, to nobody. Harry was thinking the same thing. Did the unicorn attack her? Did unicorns attack people? 
Ow! yelled Ron. Harry looked over, and saw that hed run into a tree. Harry stopped running, and laughed.
Ron! Cmon! Youre not that stupid! How could you have run into a tree that was right in front of you? Ron stepped back, and rubbed his head.
It wasnt there a second ago! he yelled at Harry.
What do you mean? Of course it was! How could it not be- Harry suddenly looked at the tree, and realized that is was not a tree at all. 
It was a leg. 
Harry and Ron screamed at the same time, but Harry looked up instead of staring at the leg. He eyed it all the way up to a massive head which had an expression of curiosity on its face. Harry then realized what it was that Ron had run into: a giant. It was at least thirty feet tall, and was clad in clothing that would have been appropriate for a beggar. It was extremely dirty, and, as Harry thought about it, smelled really bad. 
Then Harry looked at the giants arm, and saw that it was extended out. He eyed it, all the way to the clenched fist a clenched fist that was holding Hermione!
Hermione! yelled Harry as loud as he could. Ron stopped screaming, and looked up at the giants fist.
Hermione! he yelled.
Help me! yelled Hermione, though it was very faint, she was at least twenty feet away. Harry ran up to the giants leg, and pulled out his wand.
Excallibus! he yelled, and a long sword popped out of the end of Harrys wand. It was very sharp, and extremely shiny. Harry brought it back, then shoved it with all of his might into the leg of the giant.
Aaaaaarg! screamed the giant. It dropped Hermione, making her fall, screaming the entire way down.
Ron! Get her! yelled Harry. He was still digging his sword into the giants leg, causing it to scream even more. When Harry heard a thump sound, he looked over, and saw the Ron had caught Hermione in his arms. She immediately jumped out of them, looking highly embarrassed, and stood up.
Harry! Lets go! she yelled. Shell come after you now!
She? asked Harry and Ron at the same time. They both looked up, and saw that it was indeed a she. It had very long, brown hair, and Harry realized that it was now bending over. 
Lets go! yelled Harry. He pulled the sword out of the giants leg, and started running away, not sure of where he was heading. He heard the massive strides of the giant, catching up to them, very quickly. It wasnt long before Harry felt as though he were being squeezed very tightly, which was exactly what was happening.
A humongous hand was curling around Harry, getting a tighter grip on him every second. Harry tried to struggle free, but it was to no avail, it was too tight. He thought of using his wand, but it was in his pocket, which he was unable to reach. Harry glanced over, and saw that Ron and Hermione were in the giants other hand, both trying to free themselves, as Harry was.
When Harry realized he was about twenty-five feet off the ground, he decided that even if he did free himself, hed be no better off when he collided with the ground.
WHA IS YOU DOIN!? yelled the giant, incredibly loud. It was so loud, Harry thought his ears were on fire at first, then he thought that they were going to explode.
I ASK YOU WHA YOU IS DOIN! yelled the giant once again. Harry was sure his brain was melting. But suddenly, another voice met his ear,
Stop! No mom, stop!
NO! NOT THIS TIME AGRID! bellowed the giant. Did she say Hagrid? Harry thought.
Put them down mom! Theyre my friends! said the voice again. As Harry listened to it this time, it did seem familiar, though he couldnt really be sure, the ringing in his ears was excruciating.
BUT-
No buts mom!
ALL RIGHT! Harry felt the sensation of going down very swiftly. It was like he was going down on a roller coaster, only faster. Harry thought he was going to scream, but his feet were on the ground before he could. Harry wobbled backwards for a second, and then brushed himself off. He looked over at Ron and Hermione, they were looking just as dazed as him.
WHYD YOU TELL ME TPUT EM DOWN?! the giant bellowed, only this time it was slightly softer.
Theyre students at this school mum, theyre my friends! said the voice again. Harry looked over to see who was speaking, and he was surprised to see that it was indeed Hagrid. 
Hagrid, Harry yelled, do you know this this giant! Hagrid smiled.
Well of course I do Harry! he said. Shes me mum! Harrys jaw dropped. Looking over, he saw Ron and Hermione with the same expression.
You mean that that stuttered Ron.
Yup, thats Fridwulfa, my mum, said Hagrid as he walked over to the leg of the giant. When he saw the huge gash in her leg, he gasped.
Mum! Who did this to you? he asked. Fridwulfa pointed an extremely large at Harry, and glared at him.
Him! He did it! Hagrid looked even more shocked at this than he did when he saw the wound.
But, mum, this is Harry Potter! Hed never do summat like that!
OH YES HE WOULD! ASK HIM! she yelled. Hagrid turned around.
Harry, did you did you
Yes, said Harry, feeling slightly guilty.
But, why? asked Hagrid, looking very sad.
She had Hermione! I didnt know what she was going to do with her! yelled Harry, pointing a finger at Fridwulfa.
Mum! Did you pick er up? asked Hagrid, indicating Hermione.
Well um she didnt sound nearly as menacing as before, or nearly as loud.
Mom! How many times have I told you! Humans do NOT like bein picked up, specially by giants!
Well I
Mum! I want you to apologize to all of- said Hagrid, but Harry stopped him.
Its okay Hagrid! said Harry. Im sorry uh Fridwulfa. I was just scared for Hermione. Instead of glaring at Harry, Fridwulfa gave him a smile.
Its okay Harry, she said, not nearly as loud as before. It didnt really hurt, and I guess I shouldnt have picked up your friend. She squatted down as low as she could to try and met Harrys gaze, but she was still a good ten feet above his head, even when all the way down.
Well, thas good. Im appy its all worked out! said Hagrid, smiling.
Uh, Hagrid? asked Ron timidly. What is she doing here anyway?
Well Im not really sposed to talk about it, said Hagrid defiantly. 
Oh come on Hagrid! Theyve already seen me! said Fridwulfa.
Well, I guess yer right mum, said Hagrid. He looked at Harry, then Ron, then Hermione, as if checking to make sure there was nothing wrong with them. Oer th summer, I was told to round up all the giants, and try an get em on our side before You-Know-Who did.
So, are there more? asked Hermione, looking around. She still seemed a little shaken form her very close encounter with the giant.
Here? Yeah, theres about two more in th forest, said Hagrid.
Three Hagrid, said Fridwulfa. Olympe jus brought in another yesterday.
Olympe? asked Harry. You mean Madame Maxime?
Yup, said Hagrid, not sounding the least bit embarrassed. She was the one who found my mum, and is off gettin some more now while I teach here.
But, doesnt she have an entire school to run? asked Harry.
Well, yes and no. Shes still th official eadmaster, but someone else took over for er for a while. Since most of the giants are around her area, we thought shed be the bes to do it, been doin a good job of it I guess!
But why are you keeping them in the Forbidden Forest? asked Harry. Theres got to be better places to hide them!
Not really Harry, said Hagrid. Giants like this kind of place, and since its near Hogwarts, its pretty safe.
Do you think youre going to get all the giants to join us, Hagrid? asked Hermione. Fridwulfa spoke,
I doubt it Hermione, she said.
You mean, theyre joining forces with You-Know-Who? Ron asked quietly, as though terrified to say even You-Know-Who.
No Ron, said Hagrid. Most of th giants perfer ter stay where they are, in their mountain home, or where ever theyre livin. A few of em will join us, but most wont, they probably wont even join You-Know-Who. Harry gave a shudder at the thought of what Voldemorts army would be like if he had hundreds of giants on his side. 
So, why are you keeping them here? Why not have an all out attack on You-Know-Who right now? asked Ron. Or are you waiting for a special time? Hagrid frowned.
Oh! Look at th time! he said, trying to change the subject. You guys better get back to the castle or youll be late fer yer classes! See ya mum! Hagrid started walking away, dragging Ron and Harry with him.
See you later Harry! yelled Fridwulfa as she stood up, and waved good bye. 
So, is this like what all the other teachers were sent out to do last Summer Hagrid? Did they have to recruit giants? Or did they have to do other things? I bet Snape had to- Rons babbling was stopped by a shout from Hagrid who let go of them. 
NO! he yelled, making all three of them feel like they were blown backwards. You should not even know abou this! You cannot talk abou this with other students, do yer understand me!? The three of them nodded in agreement, far to scared to even think about disagreeing.
Good, said Hagrid, much more softly. Dumbledore would skin me alive if he knew yer three saw er! As they were walking back to the edge of the forest, the whole reason that the three of them had come out finally came to Harry.
Hagrid, he asked, do you know where we can find a gryffin, an chameleon, and a unicorn? Hagrid immediately tuned around, staring at Harry.
Uh depends why, Harry, he said suspiciously.
Theyre um for uh Professor McGonagall! he said, trying to come up with a good story.
Now what would she need those for? asked Hagrid.
To um uh grade students on their accuracy! One of her classes had to change some stuff into those animals, and she just wanted something to compare their transfigurations to, something besides pictures in a book, said Harry. Ron and Hermione looked at him, amazed that he could come up with such a good story.
Oh! said Hagrid, looking much happier. Well, in that case, sure! I can get the chameleon and unicorn easily enough but the gryffin that might be a little difficult Ill see what I can do. You tell her that, okay Harry? 
Okay Hagrid, said Harry. He waved good bye to Hagrid, and then ran back to the castle with Ron and Hermione. When they finally arrived at the front gates, Ron smiled at Harry.
Excellent story there Harry! I thought you were going to tell him we were becoming Animagi! he said. Hey Harry, you think instead of using Aragog to scare everyone away, we could use a giant?
I dont think so Ron, theyre on our side, we dont want to take advantage of them, said Hermione.
Yeah, I guess youre right. Its just that any opportunity to not use a spider, Id prefer, he said as Harry and Hermione laughed.


Chapter 14- Dueling and Morphing
The next few weeks of school went very well for Harry. They were not doing anything new in any of his classes, so every free moment he had, he practiced changing himself without a wand. By his next meeting with Professor McGonagall, Harry could make his fingers grow more than a foot and back to normal in less than a second. Ron and Hermione were able to do almost as well, but Hermione was actually having a little trouble. Since she was studying for the O.W.L.s every minute, she didnt have much free time to practice. 
When the day finally came to begin their next level of training, all three of them walked up to the Transfiguration classroom feeling quite confident in their ability. When they walked in, though, they were shocked to see smoke filling the entire room. Harry began to panic, what had happened to Professor McGonagall? Was she okay?
Professor! he yelled as loud as he could, hoping she would respond to him. Did someone set fire to the room?
Over here Potter, over here! came Professor McGonagalls voice from across the room. She didnt sound like she was in the least bit of trouble, in fact, she sounded excited. Harry walked towards her voice, coughing and wheezing the whole way. The smoke was so thick, how could professor McGonagall not be in trouble?
When he saw her, however, he realized why she wasnt in trouble. She was inside a giant bubble that was perfectly clear of smoke, except for a thin line of it that was escaping from a small hole in the bubble. Professor McGonagall had a grin on her face as she was stirring a multicolored potion that was frothing and bubbling all over.
It should be ready soon Mr. Malfoy! squealed Professor McGonagall with delight. Harry looked over to the other side of the bubble and saw Draco Malfoy standing there with a very wide grin on his face.
Why is he making his potion already!? asked Ron angrily.
Mr. Malfoys potion required a bit more preparation than a normal Animagus potion would, said Professor McGonagall.
Why is that? asked Hermione, sounding hurt. She wasnt used to others doing more advanced things than her. 
Because, said Professor McGonagall, I am pleased to announce that Mr. Malfoy will be Hogwarts first Polymagus!
You mean that Malfoy!? asked Ron, in surprise, pointing a finger at Malfoy.
Yes I do Mr. Weasley, said Professor McGonagall. You three can start on your potions now, I have three cauldrons set aside for you. Professor Fletcher will assist you. She waved her arm lazily behind her, indicating three small black cauldrons. 
But, how do you know hes a Polymagus and were not? asked Hermione, almost on the verge of tears. 
Actually, replied Professor McGonagall, I have just discovered a spell of recent invention that allowed me to discover this. The spell lets one Animagus see the human form of another Animagus. When Mr. Malfoy did a transformation, and I used the spell, and I couldnt see him, I knew that there were only two possibilities: either he is not an Animagus which cannot be true since he transformed before my eyes, or he is a Polymagus. The spell cannot be used to detect those. Malfoy gave a sinister smile. He was really enjoying this, thought Harry, being better than them.
So, you just had to be better than us, didnt you Malfoy? asked Ron, practically spitting. Professor McGonagall looked appalled.
What do you mean Mr. Weasley!? yelled Professor McGonagall. Being a Polymagus is a very rare gift! In fact, I can only think of three wizards in the history of magic, not including Mr. Malfoy here, who were Polymagi. This is certainly not something that he chose to have.
Yeah Weasley, said Malfoy, almost sarcastically. Of course I didnt choose this! What did he mean? thought Harry. How could he have chosen to be a Polymagus?
I believe the rest of you have potions to be making, came a familiar voice. Harry looked over, and saw Professor Fletcher standing there, looking impatient.
Oh, sorry professor! said Harry, Ron, and Hermione together as they walked away from Professor McGonagall and over to their cauldrons, trying to ignore Malfoys snickers.
Alright, said Professor Fletcher. Hagrid brought up your three animals this morning. I need each of you to get a piece of it, and then give it to me. Harry and Hermione, get a hair from your animal. Ron, yours will be a bit more difficult. Youll have to get the chameleons tail.
His tail? asked Ron, confused.
Yes, but it will grow back. Dont worry, said Professor Fletcher. Your animals are over there. He pointed to three cages that were outside the bubble. Each one of them had an animal inside it.
Harry, Ron, and Hermione stepped through the bubble, and towards the cages, the smoke significantly cleared since Malfoys potion had just stopped bubbling. They each arrived at the cage of their respective animal.
Harrys cage was about three feet tall, and five feet long. He peered inside and saw a wonderful creature. It looked like a lion, but it was not a brownish-orange, it was a light gold with a huge bushy mane. Harry saw the wings on the gryffin, they were a bright white, and when light from the window shined on them, Harry had to turn away from the shine. The gryffin gave a lazy yawn, and the teeth were magnificent. They appeared to be made out of crystal, and there were hundreds of them, all perfectly clear and sparkling. When he finished with his yawn, the gryffin glanced over at Harry, and their eyes met. 
Harry felt hypnotized. Whatever he did, he felt as though he could not leave the gryffins view. He fell deeper and deeper into them, and he felt as though he was the gryffin. He could feel fur all over his body, he felt extremely warm all over. Harry closed his eyes, and he felt himself flying. It wasnt anything like being on a broom, he was flying under his own power
Harry! yelled Hermione. Harry opened his eyes and suddenly remembered where he was. He looked over, and saw that Hermione was holding a long, silvery hair. The unicorn inside her cage was asleep. On top of that cage was a smaller one with a small green blur running all around it. Harry looked over next to that cage, and saw Ron holding a small green thing in his hand, far away from him, as if it were something revolting. Then, Harry remembered, it was something bad. It was the chameleons tail. 
Harry? Did you get your hair yet? asked Hermione. Harry gave her a glazed look. Are you okay Harry? You look like youre asleep.
No, Im okay, said Harry. He reached his hand inside the cage containing the gryffin. It was still staring at Harry, not moving or blinking. Whats wrong with it? wondered Harry. He nervously moved his hand toward the mane of the gryffin, and quickly pulled out a hair from it. The gryffin didnt move. 
Harry stood up, and backed away slowly, returning to his cauldron which was now filled with a thick, black liquid that Professor Fletcher had obviously put in there. The same was in Ron and Hermiones cauldrons. 
Okay, now put your animal piece into the potion, and wait until it changes color, said Professor Fletcher to them. Harry dipped his hair into the cauldron, and bubbles suddenly started appeared near where it hit the concoction. After a few seconds, the potion turned a dark yellow. Harry looked over and saw that Hermiones was a light-red, almost pink, and Rons was a deep green. Professor Fletcher was handing each of them a small box.
Drop this box in now. It contains all the rest of the ingredients for the potion, said Professor Fletcher to them. Harry dropped the box in, and the potion immediately started fuming. Thick white smoke poured out of the top, and into the air. 
Oh, this is exciting! Isnt it? said Professor Fletcher. Ron shrugged,
Yeah, I guess it is. I mean, I cant wait to actually- 
No that! said Professor Fletcher loudly. I mean, Mr. Malfoy here being our first Polymagus! Harry, Ron, and Hermione sighed.
He has the potential and talent necessary for transfiguration unlike any other student Ive ever seen.
Harry was about to respond, saying something bad about Malfoy, but just then he was taken surprise when his potion stopped smoking and bubbling and became white. Professor Fletcher looked over at them, taking notice of this.
Your potions are ready. You need to drink them quickly, he said. He gave each of them a small glass. Harry dunked his glass into the potion. It was surprisingly warm, and as he put his glass further down, got almost unbearably hot, too the point of burning. Harry quickly brought the glass up to his lips, and drank it. It tasted very good, like liquid happiness. However, a very unexpected thing happened. This potion didnt feel like it was going down his throat and to his stomach. It felt as though it was going up. It was flowing up his sinuses, and into his brain. It was seething its way through every pore in Harrys mind.
This did not feel nearly as good as drinking it. In fact, it was very painful. Harry dropped the glass, and it shattered into a million pieces. Harrys head felt as though it was ripping apart. He glanced over and saw that Ron and Hermione were obviously experiencing the same feelings since they were squirming on the floor and had their hands gripping their screaming faces.
Harry decided he had to do something to try and stop the pain. He focused his mind on a joyous thought, and tried only to think of that, like he did in Mrs. Figgs class. This was just a bigger PainBall, thought Harry, trying to reassure himself. Harry searched his mind for the happiest thought he could muster the time he was with Cho. 
Suddenly, the pain went away. Harry took his hands off of his face, and put them back down to his sides. Harry walked over to Ron and Hermione, each of whom was still squirming on the floor. Harry helped them up, off the ground. They stopped screaming, but were still clutching their heads.
Dont worry. The pain will go away in a few seconds, said Professor McGonagall. She walked over from Malfoys cauldron over to them. After she said it, Ron and Hermione stopped gripping their heads.
How come your pain went away so fast Harry? asked Ron.
I just used that little technique we learned in Defense Against the Dark Arts, responded Harry.
I shouldve remembered to use that! said Hermione. What caused the pain anyway professor?
It was caused by the animals DNA merging with yours. You have to contain twice as much as before, in the same amount of space. Your body had to change around slightly to make room, said Professor McGonagall. Now that you have had the potion, we can go into your next phase of training: actually turning into the animal.
See you later professor! said Malfoy. He walked out of the room, carrying a glass full of his multicolored potion.
Why is he leaving? asked Ron. Doesnt he have to train with us?
Well, no Mr. Weasley, said Professor McGonagall. Mr. Malfoy will continue his training privately. He will need err special attention.
Why is he leaving now, though? asked Hermione.
Mr. Malfoys potion will hurt him considerably more than yours did. He is taking in the DNA of several animals, and may have to stay the night with Mrs. Pomfrey. He is heading to the hospital wing now. A sudden feeling of sadness came over Harry. Even though he and Malfoy were enemies, he still didnt want him to have to go through pain like that. He didnt want anyone to have to. Just the one animal potion was bad enough, a many animal potion would be worse than the Cruciatus Curse. 
Now back to your training. By the end of this session, you should all be able to form the head of your animal. To start, close your eyes.
Harry closed his eyes, and darkness was all around him.
Picture your animals face. Imagine every curve, every hair, every detail, no matter how small, said professor McGonagall soothingly. Harry visualized the gryffins face. He remembered the gryffins golden hair, its crystal teeth, and its deep eyes. He tried to picture the head on his own body, and had to keep from laughing.
Open your eyes, came Professor McGonagalls voice. Harry opened his eyes and there was a mirror floating in front of his face. Harry jumped back when he saw what he saw in it. 
Harry saw his face in it, only it was more hairy. His entire head was covered in golden hair, and he had a small mane growing all around his neck. Harry opened his mouth and saw small, clear, sharp teeth popping out. 
Harry looked over at Ron and burst out laughing (well, growling). Rons face was a light green, and he had big, bulging eyes that were at least the size of baseballs. Hermione had a shiny horn coming out of her head that was about five inches long, and her face was becoming slightly elongated. But, just as Harry saw them all this way, all three of them went back to normal. They all looked extremely disappointed.
Whyd we go back to normal so quickly professor? asked Hermione, feeling her head for any sign of a horn.
You were not concentrating on your animal form, said Professor McGonagall sternly. You three were looking at each others transformations, and you stopped thinking about your own.
How come we didnt transform exactly into our animals professor? asked Ron. I imagined every detail on the chameleon, and all I got were the eyes.
And the green skin, whispered Harry to Ron. They both laughed silently.
In order to do a perfect transformation, Mr. Weasley, you need to exaggerate your animals features in your mind. If its horn is eight inches tall, imagine it to be sixteen. If its skin is a light-green, imagine it to be a dark lime. The more you exaggerate your features, the more accurate you will be.
And Sirius made this looked easy, whispered Ron to Harry. Professor McGonagall had heard him.
Yes, he does make it look easy Mr. Weasley. As does any Animagus. However, it took him all of three years to get it down perfectly, and each of you has barely worked on it for a week. Now, continue imagining your animals and their features. When you do transform, concentrate hard on staying that way, try not to become distracted.
Harry, Ron, and Hermione worked on their transformations until late into the evening. They got tips from Professor McGonagall and by the time she announced the lesson was over, each for them could perfectly form the head of their animals, and hold it for about ten seconds. It was very difficult to keep from laughing and becoming distracted while transforming, especially when Rons head shrunk down to the size of the chameleons, being far to small for his body.
As they were walking down the hallways, finally leaving their lesson, talking excitedly about their transformations, they stopped suddenly after hearing a very loud scream from far away.
What was that? whimpered Hermione.
I dont know, said Harry, standing dead in his tracks looking around. The voice screamed again.
Its coming from over there! yelled Ron. He pointed his wand in the direction of the Great Hall, and when they entered the room, the voice screamed again. All of their heads tuned the other door that led out of the Great Hall, and near the Headmasters office. They ran though that door, and when they got through it, the scream came again.
Its coming from the Hospital Wing, said Harry. At once, he immediately realized what was going on. Its Malfoy. He must have drink his potion. Each of them put an expression of forced sadness on their faces, and the scream came again.
Should we see him? asked Hermione.
No, thats probably the last thing he wants: to be comforted by his enemies, us thinking hes weak, said Harry. Lets give him this one. They all walked away from the Hospital Wing, and back to the Gryffindor Common Room. While they were walking, they head no more screaming, so either Malfoy wasnt in pain anymore, or Madam Pomfrey had just put a Sound Proofing Charm on the room. 
Harry and Ron said goodnight to Hermione, and they each went up the staircases into their dorms. When Harry and Ron, got in their room, Seamus, Dean, and Neville were already asleep. Ron strode over to his bed, and pulled out a calendar from under his pillow.
Whats that? asked Harry as his put on his night shirt.
Oh, this? said Ron. Its a calendar. Im marking off the days until Halloween.
Why are you doing that? asked Harry. Ron looked at him in surprise.
Dont you remember? Thats when were going to rescue Lupin and Sirius from Azkaban! said Ron as he took out a red quill and marked off another day.
Oh yeah, said Harry. He had forgotten about that with the excitement of becoming an Animagus. They still had work to do to prepare. How long until we go? 
Two weeks, said Ron, with a hint of fear in his voice. He was evidently no more anxious to do this than Harry was. 
All through breakfast the next morning, Malfoy kept glancing at Harry, Ron, and Hermione, and laughing. Soon being followed by almost the entire Slytherin table. 
I wish there was some way we could show Malfoy how bad he really is, and how good we are. Like, dueling with him or something, said Ron as he lazily did a Originus Charm on a copied ball in Charms class. Harry got an idea:
Thats it Ron! said Harry excitedly. We can start the Dueling Club again! Ron and Hermione laughed. There was a Dueling Club in their second year, but it was very unsuccessful. All they had gotten from it was the Disarming Spell. 
You cant be serious Harry, said Ron. I mean, weve got Quidditch and rescuing Sirius and Lupin to worry about.
Oh come on Ron, said Harry. Our next Quidditch match isnt until after Halloween, and we can set the meeting of the club for after we rescue Sirius and Lupin.
If we rescue them, said Hermione, pessimistically. Harry and Ron looked at her.
That doesnt sound like you Hermione, said Ron.
Its just that, well, Ive been reading about Azkaban-
Big surprise there, said Ron quietly so that only Harry could hear.
-and itll be next to impossible to get inside, much less rescue Sirius and Lupin.
Dont worry Hermione. I Ive got it all worked out, lied Harry. He didnt know what made him say that, he just wanted to make sure she wouldnt back out of their plan.
Well, I guess so, but, I expect to know exactly what it is before we go! said Hermione, looking slightly happier.
Anyway, said Ron. Back to the Dueling Club.
I thought you said it was a bad idea, said Harry.
Well, with You-Know-Who around again, itd be nice to have some dueling experience on our side, said Ron. And it would be nice to kick Malfoys butt.
What do you say Hermione? You in? asked Harry.
Sure, I mean, itd be great practice for the O.W.L.s, said Hermione, not looking at either of them, but concentrating on her Originus Charm. So yeah, of course Im in. 
Now the only problem is: which teacher are we going to get to supervise us? asked Ron.
Maybe Professor Fletcher or Mrs.- er Professor Figg, said Harry.
Ive got a better idea! said Hermione. How about Professor Flitwick? I mean, he was the dueling champion when he was in school so Im sure he could give us some excellent tips!
Good idea, said Harry and Ron together. Just then, the bell rang, signaling the end of class. Instead of leaving, Harry, Ron, and Hermione went up to professor Flitwick.
Excuse me Professor, said Harry. Professor Flitwick spun around with a smile so wide, it looked like it would barely fit on his small head.
Yes Harry? What is it?
Well, we were thinking about starting up another Dueling Club, and we were wondering if youd want to help us, said Harry hopefully. Professor Flitwicks smile got, if it is possible, even larger.
Oh, you three Id be honored! squeaked Professor Flitwick.
Really? said Harry in surprise. He didnt think Professor Flitwick would be that eager to do it. You really want to help?
Of course I do Harry! said Professor Flitwick. I think dueling is an excellent thing to know, and I was the school champion in my day, you know. We should have our first meeting on Halloween, when-
No, thats not a good day professor, interrupted Hermione. He looked at her funny. Thats um when we have to stay after with professor McGonagall to do some extra credit.
Oh, ok. Well, how about a week after Halloween? asked Professor Flitwick.
Thats good, said Harry, wanting to sound agreeable to Professor Flitwick since he didnt ask any questions about their extra credit in Transfiguration. 
Well need a captain you know, said Professor Flitwick, looking at Harry. How about it Harry? You up to it?
Yeah Harry, it was your idea after all, said Hermione. Ron, however, was silent. 
No, said Harry defiantly. I think we should have a competition and the winner should become captain. I dont want people to think Im captain just become Im famous. Ron gave Harry a smile of appreciation. Though he never said it out loud, Ron had always been jealous of Harry, and Harry wanted to give him the opportunity to show himself.
Excellent idea, said Professor Flitwick as his next class was filing in. Well I have to go teach my next class now, and I suspect you have to go to your next lesson. Harry, Ron, and Hermione each nodded.
Yes, and, thanks professor, said Harry as they left the classroom, avoiding the small first years walking in.
Hey Harry! yelled Joe, the little Gryffindor first year. Joo rozorz meh soxorz!
Uh good, said Harry, running away from him as fast as possible. 

Chapter 15- The Plan
Harry still had no idea how he, Ron, and Hermione made it through the next week. Every day they would wake up, go to their classes, do their homework, go to Animagus lessons (Malfoy was never present at one), go to Quidditch practice (Hermione would watch and read her books), talk to Professor Flitwick about how the Dueling Club should be organized, and then end the day discussing how they would rescue Sirius and Lupin, and collapse in their beds at around two in the morning.
All of this was paying off though: each of them could successfully transform the heads of their animals, and keep it for as long as they wanted. Ron was able to get down to the size of a chameleon fairly well, and Harry could even transform his back into wings, and he was getting pretty good at flying with them. None of them had seen what animal Malfoy had chosen. 
The Dueling Club was decided to be almost like official duels: two teams of two wizards each who fight until either one gives up, or is disarmed. If, after the qualifiers for the captain, people wanted to do un-official duels (one on one, two on one, or even three on one), those would take place. 
Maybe we should cause a distraction, suggested Ron at their latest meeting on how to rescue Sirius and Lupin. Halloween would be tomorrow, and they still didnt have a good idea on how to get in to Azkaban, much less get into some cells and rescue two people. I mean, if we can confuse the dementors, then maybe we can slip by them.
But what kind of distraction Ron? asked Hermione, right before she yawned. It was already midnight, and the Gryffindor Common room was completely empty. It was almost pitch black except for a few candles around the three of them.
Harry can do his p- p- p- Patronus Charm, yawned Ron. A Patronus Charm was a spell that conjured a patronus, a kind of silvery protector, a shield between you and a dementor. It prevented the happiness from being sucked out of you.
No, I dont think so Ron, said Harry. I mean, theres bound to be hundreds of dementors there, and I dont think a single patronus can fend them all away. And even if it does, theres going to probably be other wizard guards there who wont be affected by it. 
Why dont we just buy some dementor costumes, run into Azkaban wearing them, and bang our heads on the cells until they open, suggested Harry sarcastically. Ron and Hermione glared at him.
Harry, we need a better plan than that! said Hermione.
Oh come on! said Harry. Were all tired, and we have a big task tomorrow! Im sure well think of something when we get there.
I dont think we should leave it to chance Harry, said Ron.
Well I do, Ron, said Harry. I have a feeling that well get an idea when we arrive. Maybe well see a secret passage or something.
Maybe youre right Harry, said Ron. Besides, weve got a bigger problem, how are we going to get to Azkaban in the first place? I mean, were not going to just walk there, are we? Harry stroked his chin,
Well, Im getting pretty good at flying with my wings, so I can do that. I guess you two can share my Firebolt, suggested Harry. 
We both wont fit, said Ron. A Firebolts only big enough for one.
Well, said Harry, Ron, you can become smaller, and then you and Hermione will fit on the broom.
Oh god, I hope no one sees us, said Hermione. A kid with wings flying next to a girl on a broom holding a ten inch boy. Harry and Ron burst out laughing and when they couldnt stop, they decided it was time for bed.
Well meet here at five o clock, just when the feast starts, said Harry as they all wobbled to their dorms.
Harry slept in later that day then he did all of his life, to catch up on the sleep he missed the last week, and to save his strength. Hed need it when he had to fly all the way to Azkaban.
When he finally got up at two in the afternoon, he sprinted down to the common room, and was surprised to see almost no one there except for Ron and Hermione (who were engaged in a game of chess) and a few younger kids.
Where have you been sleepyhead? asked Hermione as Ron took her queen. Harry shook himself awake, and looked around.
Where is everyone? he asked groggily.
Hogsmeade, said Ron as he put Hermione in checkmate. Its the first trip of the year. We decided not to go, Hogsmeades started to lose its excitement. Harry smiled, Hogsmeade was plenty exciting, especially when he was at the theater with Cho. All of a sudden, Ron gave a very loud laugh.
What is it Ron? asked Hermione. I didnt play that bad did I?
No, no its not that Hermione, said Ron, still laughing. Its just that I cant believe we didnt think about this before how is it that were going to be here and at Azkaban at the same time? Harry and Hermione stared at him.
What do you mean Ron? asked Harry.
Well, people are bound to notice that were gone for a few days, arent they? asked Ron. I mean, while were at Azkaban, how will people not notice that were not here? Harry and Hermiones mouths dropped wide open.
How did we not think of that? asked Hermione, sounding appalled at the fact that she did not think of something. 
How are we going to accomplish that? asked Harry. He looked at Hermione, expecting an answer.
Well, we could make models of ourselves and then try to bring them to life, but oh no theres no way we can do anything! We only have three hours! Why didnt we think of this earlier!? Hermione looked as though she might collapse from worrying.
Hermione! yelled Harry. Calm down! We will think of something!
What? In three hours? Youre going to think of something? she asked.
Well, yeah started Harry, but then he looked around. Actually no. Hermione looked like she was going to explode,
No?! Well, we have to think of-
No, I mean I wont think of something, Aylar will! said Harry. He looked over at Aylar, who was busy making a perfect sculpture of a dragon out of a large block of marble to the entertainment of some other first years, looked over at Harry, apparently hearing him say his name. 
What will I think of, Harry? he asked. Harry had to think of something fast, he wasnt ready just yet.
Well, Aylar you see um well Harry had to think of something fast or Aylar would get suspicious. Suddenly, and idea popped into his head, I like Ginny. Aylar raised an eyebrow.
And what does that have to do with anything? he asked.
Well Im currently going out with Cho, continued Harry, having a slight idea about where he was heading. You see, I promised Cho that Id go out with her tonight after the Halloween feast, but then Ginny came up to me, and asked if I would go out with her the same time. I didnt want to say no to her since I like her, but I also dont want to cancel my date with Cho. So, I need to be in two places at once. Any ideas? Ron and Hermione were looking at Harry with an expression of amazement on their faces. Aylar, however, smiled.
Of course Harry, he said. Just use a Cloning Charm on yourself. Harry could have kicked himself in the face.
Oh! Thanks Aylar! said Harry affectionately. Aylar started to walk away.
Dont mention it. Oh, and by the way Harry dont expect any luck with Ginny shes already busy, said Aylar as he walked back to his group, shaking his head. Harry turned around to an excited Hermione, and a confused Ron.
Excellent story Harry! said Hermione. I couldnt have come up with anything better!
What did he mean by Ginny being busy? asked Ron, being big-brotherly. What does he know that we dont?
Uh, about a million spells, said Harry. Then, seeing the look on Rons face, Oh dont worry Ron, he was probably just joking. Rons frown turned into a smile again.
Yeah, I guess youre right Harry, said Ron.
Geez, whats wrong with me today? Hermione asked herself. I never thought about us having to be in two places at once, and I didnt think of using the Cloning Charm. Maybe I should see Madam Pomfrey. Ron and Harry laughed. 
We had better get started making the clones of ourselves, said Harry. In case a problem comes up, we want to have time figure it out. Ron and Hermione nodded in agreement.
Where should we make the clones? asked Ron. 
Well, definitely not here, said Harry. Or in any of the classrooms. Who knows who might pop in and see two of each of us. Where would we be guaranteed that no one would ever see us? A smirk came across Hermiones face.
The girls bathroom! she said. In their second year at Hogwarts, they had to make a Polyjuice potion, and to hide it from everyone, they made it in the broken down girls bathroom.
Great idea Hermione! said Ron. The only person whod see us would be Moaning Myrtle, and its not like shed care. Moaning Myrtle was the miserable ghost of a girl who haunted the bathroom. 
Right, lets go, said Harry. They walked out of the common room, and to the girls bathroom. Even though no one would see them, or know theyd been in there, it still felt weird to Harry to go inside. When they got in, it was exactly how Harry had remembered it: rusty and disgusting.
Whos there? came a voice from one of the stalls. The door to it opened, and before them was Moaning Myrtle. She floated about three feet off the ground, right above a puddle of water which Harry hoped was made from Myrtles tears. 
Instead of crying and moping around, though, a smile came across Myrtles face as she saw the three of them. She flew towards them, and put her arms around them. Harry, Ron, and Hermione were all very surprised.
Oh, its so good to see you again especially you Harry, said Myrtle, blushing slightly. Harry made a very forced smile, and Ron nudged him.
I think Myrtle likes you Harry, he said, trying hard not to laugh. Myrtle, however, appeared to have heard them.
Hey, Im old, not dead! she said, jokingly..
What? said Hermione. Myrtle, youre young, and you are dead! All three of them laughed, and, surprisingly, Myrtle took part in the laughter. Harry, Ron, and Hermione stopped immediately. This was the first time any of them had head Myrtle laugh. It was very eerie.
Uh, Myrtle? asked Ron. Why are you laughing? Myrtle stopped, and glared at Ron.
Because what she said was funny, Ron, spat Myrtle. Am I not allowed to laugh at funny thing? Ron went red.
Uh, no. Of course not Myrtle its just that well, youve never laughed before, stuttered Ron. 
Well, Ive taken a new outlook on life- err death, Ron. Its been more than fifty years since Ive died, and I still havent crossed over into the next life yet. Ron and Harry looked confused. You know, said Myrtle, seeing their faces. When I stop being a ghost and become a spirit.
Yeah, sure Myrtle said Harry, not really knowing what she was talking about.
So what are you doing here? asked Myrtle. 
We have to make copies of ourselves, blurted Hermione. She immediately put her hands over her mouth as though to try and erase what she said, but it was too late.
Why do you need to do that? asked Myrtle suspiciously. Harry decided he might as well use the same story as before.
Because all of us want to go to Hogsmeade with two different people, said Harry. Myrtle eyed him suspiciously.
Really? she asked slowly. All three of you?
Yes, Harry, Ron, and Hermione said in unison. 
Okay. Well then, Ill leave you to do that, she said as the disappeared out a window in the room. The three of them breathed a sigh of relief.
Well theres something you dont see everyday, said Harry. 
Lets do this, said Ron, taking his wand out of his pocket. Harry and Hermione followed him and took their wands out as well.
Lets make a circle, and each make a copy of the other, said Hermione. Harry nodded in agreement, it would be rather difficult to do it on yourself. Harry got behind Ron, and he got behind Hermione. They formed a rather triangular circle. Hermione pointed her wand to Harrys back, and Ron pointed his wand to Hermiones back. Harry pointed his wand to Rons back. 
Clonusout! they all yelled at the same time. Harry immediately saw a fuzzy version of Ron forming next to him. He suddenly felt as though he had run a mile. Copying humans was evidently harder than copying pillows. The copied Ron was slowly coming into focus, like a bad television station you were adjusting. Every second was like sprinting another hundred yards. Harry was panting now, feeling his muscles ache all over.
Finally, after what felt like a marathon run, the copy of Ron was crystal clear, and Harry collapsed on the floor, gasping for breath. Each was difficult to draw, but he was slowly gaining his strength back. Harry wondered how Ron and Hermione did. He immediately leapt to his feet, and looked at them. They were standing upright, but there were no clones of Harry or Hermione to be seen.
Where are your clones? asked Harry. Ron and Hermione bet their heads down.
We couldnt do it Harry, said Hermione. It just took too much energy. Harry put his hand on his forehead, disappointed.
Youre just stronger than us Harry, said Ron. I guess you do more exercise in those Quidditch practices than I do. Harry gave a deep sigh.
Well, what are we going to do? asked Harry. We only have one clone.
Well could you do us? asked Hermione, twisting her foot on the ground. Harry sighed again.
I guess I could, but Id rather not if I didnt have to, said Harry. But suddenly, and idea came to him. Ive got it! Harry pointed his wand at Rons arm.
Engorgio! yelled Harry. Rons arm got bigger and bigger, the muscles were bulging, they looked as though they were in danger of popping out of Rons skin. When Rons biceps were about six inches high, Harry stopped, and did the spell on the other one.
There you go Ron! You should have plenty of strength, enough to make a hundred clones, said Harry. Ron raised his arms above his head, and then brought them down upon a sink behind him. There was an earsplitting loud crash, and then all that remained of the sink was a small pile of dust.
I could get used to this! said Ron. 
Well, you shouldnt, said Hermione. The Engorgio Charm only works on humans for a little while. Youre massive arms will be back to how they were before in less than a half hour. Ron frowned.
Oh, and I was just getting to like them! said Ron.
Yeah, yeah, back to work now, said Harry. Ron, use the Cloning Charm on me and Hermione, and then lets get ready to go, we only have about two hours left. Ron quickly took his wand out, and pointed it at Harry.
Clonusout! he yelled, and Harry suddenly felt lighter. He felt as though he were a few inches off the ground. Then, he felt like he was spinning, slowly at first but then faster and faster. Harry felt as though he was going to be sick, he wished Ron would hurry up with the spell. 
Then, suddenly, the sensation stopped, and Harry saw a copy of himself standing right next to him. The clones eyes were closed, it looked like it was asleep. 
After he was done admiring his clone, Harry looked over at Hermione who was eyeing her copy, which also appeared to be asleep. It was very odd, seeing two identical people standing right next to each other. But, Harry thought about Fred and George, and the idea didnt sound as odd as before. 
Alright, said Harry to Ron. Good job! Ron walked over to his clone, who was asleep as well. 
How do we wake them up? asked Ron, looking at his copy as though it were a statue, peering around the head and the back.
I dunno, said Harry. Snap your fingers? Ron laughed, and loudly snapped his fingers directly in front of his clone. Unexpectedly, Rons clones eyes opened quickly.
Ah! yelled the clone, walking backwards. Whats going on here!? He walked backwards more, until he suddenly tripped over his feet, and fell into a trashcan. Ron walked over to him, and helped him out.
Why, why are you me? asked the clone of Ron. Ron laughed.
Well, were not perfect clones, are we? asked Ron, indicating his bulging arms. His clone gave a very weak smile. Harry, seeing that this was not going anywhere, decided to speak up.
You see, said Harry to Rons clone, you are a clone of Ron. It was the best Harry could think of to say. How else do you break it to someone that youre a clone of someone else? Rons clone had an expression of utmost surprise on his face.
You mean Im just a clone of him? asked Rons clone, pointing to Ron.
Yes, said Ron. We need you to pretend to be me for a few days.
I am you, said the clone. Ron sighed.
No, you dont understand, said Ron. Harry copied me, and you are the copy. The clone smiled and shook his head.
No way, he said. I cant be a clone. I am Ron. I have memories, I am not a copy. Harry now knew they were definitely not going to convince Rons clone that he was a copy. They had to form a different plan.
You know what, said Harry to Rons clone. Youre right. Youre not a clone, we are the clones. Rons clone folded his arms, and nodded his head.
I knew it, he said. Ron and Hermione looked at Harry, apparently confused. Harry mouthed, Play along.
If youre the clones, asked Rons clone, then why did you pretend I was? Harry gritted his teeth, he hadnt shouldve expected this.
Um you see we wereum testing you. To uh make sure you were the originals. The people we were cloned from. Only the true originals would have all the memories. The clone of Ron seemed to have accepted this.
I see but, why dont I remember cloning you guys and, why does my clone have bigger arms then me? he asked them.
Well, um to answer your first question um the Cloning Charm took so much energy out of you that you uh collapsed, said Harry, hoping that Rons copy would believe him. And your clones arms are bigger than yours because uh you accidentally used an Engorgio Charm on them when you were almost unconscious from using the Cloning Charm. Though he looked a little confused, Rons clone seemed satisfied with this. 
One last question, he said. Why did we clone you?
Because were going to Azkaban to rescue Sirius and Lupin, said Harry. Rons clone smiled and nodded.
Yeah, why risk our necks when we can make clones of ourselves and let them do it? he said, laughing afterwards. 
Speaking of which, said Hermione, playing along, weve got to go now. We want to have time to scare Aragog into the Great Hall. Dont forget to play along with the crowd and be scared. Rons clone nodded, and Ron, Harry and Hermione started to walk out of the bathroom. 
Oh, dont forget to wake them up! yelled Harry to Rons clone just before he left the bathroom. As soon as they were outside the shut door, all three of them leaned against the wall, and slid down, giving a deep sigh. 
Great job Harry, said Ron, rubbing his face with his now back-to-normal-size arms. Great story. I cant believe you came up with another good one! Harry grinned and looked at his watch. 
Oh no! he said, realizing the time. we only have a half an hour until the Halloween Feast starts! We really have got to get going! The three of them stood up, and ran to the Gryffindor common room, which was now filled with students returning from Hogsmeade. Harry and Ron tried to avoid as many people as they could as they ran to their dorm to get the map to Azkaban and Harrys Firebolt. As soon as they found it, they bolted back to the common room, met up with Hermione, and ran out to Hagrids hut by the Forbidden Forest.
Are you ready for this? asked Harry. Ron and Hermione gave him nervous smiles and nods before they entered the forest.
All we have to do is find a spider, and then follow it, said Harry, remembering how he and Ron found Aragog before. They walked deeper and deeper into the forest, with only small beams from their wands to guide them in their search. After several minutes of searching, Harry saw something move.
I see something! he yelled quietly to Ron and Hermione. They crept up to him, and shone their beams in the direction he was pointing. Their beams landed on a small, dark green bush that was shaking.
Ah! said a voice. Harry turned around to see if it was Ron or Hermione, but they were still fixated on the bush.
Did you hear that? Harry asked them. They shook their heads.
Ah! Bright! said the voice again.
Did you hear that? Harry asked them again. Rona and Hermione shook their heads again. How could they not hear it? Then, it came to Harry. 
Show yourself, said Harry. Only, it didnt come out in those words, it came out in a long hiss, exactly like a snake. Ron and Hermione looked at Harry, afraid, but he knew what he was doing. Harry was a Parselmouth, he could talk to snakes. 
That night, when Voldemort attacked Harry and his parents, and Voldemort used the Killing Curse on Harry, Voldemort did not only lose his powers, he transferred some of them into Harry. The scar on Harrys forehead was where some of Voldemorts powers flowed into him. One of the powers that Harry had received was Voldemorts ability to converse with snakes, something that very few wizards could do. 
The snake popped his head of the bush, and stared at Harry with unblinking eyes. 
You speak my language, it hissed at Harry. If you understand me, please remove your light sticks. Harry assumed he meant their wands, so he put his wand down, and signaled to Ron and Hermione to do the same. 
Yes, I speak your language, hissed Harry back. I need to know, have you seen any spiders around here? The snake started at him for a moment. Harry knew that spiders feared snakes, so the snake should know if it had seen any spiders running from it. 
Yes, it crackled at him. 
Where? asked Harry. 
Where they always are at this time, it said. In the Moon Patch.
What is the Moon Patch? asked Harry.
It is in the middle of this place, this forest. It is where the illumination from the ball of light in the sky is the brightest.
Thank you, said Harry.
You are welcome Harry Potter, said the snake.
How do you know my name? asked Harry. 
Everyone in this place knows your name. You are the one who defeated the Dark Lord, you are the one who defeated his master, and you are the one who will defeat the master of him as well. 
What do you mean, the Dark Lords master? asked Harry. He didnt think Voldemort had a master, and even if he did, he didnt think he defeated him.
You defeated him, the one your people refer to as Voldemort said the snake. Now Harry was really confused.
If Voldemort is the Dark Lords master, who is the Dark Lord? 
The master snake, the basilisk, it hissed. Now Harry understood. Animals didnt consider Voldemort to be the Dark Lord, they thought the basilisks were. However, it was understandable, just one look at a basilisks eyes, and you would be instantly killed frozen for all eternity. 
Thank you again, hissed Harry as he, Ron, and Hermione ran off. 
What did it say? asked Hermione as they ran off. 
He said that the spiders are in the middle of the forest, in a place where the moon light shines, said Harry, skipping the part about the whole Dark Lord and his master thing. Ron shuddered.
Do we have to use the spiders? asked Ron as they continued running. I mean, cant we just leave for Azkaban now?
No Ron, said Harry. If we leave now, theres almost a one hundred percent chance that well be seen, caught, and punished. We need to distract everyone.
Alright alright, said Ron. They went a little further, and Harry suddenly saw a bright light creeping through a few trees.
I think the clearings coming up, he whispered. Harry was right. Within seconds, after working their way through countless trees and bushes, they came to a large clearing in the middle of the woods. 
It was a sight to behold, Harry had never seen anything like it. Millions of spiders of all sizes ranging from that of a nickel to the giant one the size of an elephant were all dancing in perfect unison in a circle. They were all synchronously clicking their pincers to create a very eerie tone. The giant spider in the middle was shooting a continuous stream of web into the air like a fountain. Harry recognized the giant spider as Aragog. 
There he is, said Harry to Ron and Hermione, pointing to Aragog. Ron and Hermione nodded. The three of them were squatting behind a large bush and peering through a hole in it. 
What are they doing? asked Ron.
They praying to the moon, said Hermione. Since all spiders fear the basilisk, it seems like an appropriate thing to do. Ron and Harry gave her confused looks, she just sighed.
Dont you know? she asked them, knowing the answer. The crowing of a rooster is fatal to a basilisk, and since the setting of the moon signifies morning, in which the rooster would crow, the spiders are performing a ceremony to ensure that it sets.
But, doesnt the rising of the sun also go along with the crowing of a rooster? asked Ron.
Yes it does Ron, said Hermione. But, since spiders prefer the night, they see the moon as a more powerful deity and worship it instead. 
Okay, enough babbling, said Harry, getting more and more freaked out by their eerie ceremony every second. We should creep around behind them, and then chase the big one in the middle up to the castle. Alright? Ron and Hermione whispered Yes, and they started walking around the spiders ceremonial circle, trying to be as quiet as possible. It was very strenuous and slow work, trying not to step on a single leaf, or say anything when your arm was pierced by a large thorn. 
However, they finally made it to the other side of the spiders, the point from which they would begin their charge. Harry looked at his basilisk watch, and he suddenly felt nervous. Not nervous like before youre about to say your lines for a play, present something in front of a class, or even right before a Quidditch game. It was nervousness like before you know youre about to die. But, Harry reminded himself that he had to do this, and he suddenly felt confidence flowing through him. 
Okay, Hermione and Ron, Im going to run out to them. As soon as I step out, aim your wands at my ring, and use the Engorgio spell. That should create a large enough basilisk to scare them away. Hermione and Ron took out their wands. Harry stood up, took a deep breath, and ran out right into the middle of the spiders ceremony. 
Chapter 16- The Return of the Phoenix
It was pure chaos. As soon as Ron and Hermione used the Engorgio spells on Harrys ring, it immediately grew almost one hundred times its size, both in length and width. It shot out like a missile off of Harrys wrist, and it hit Aragog in one of his eight eyes as he was spinning. He stopped shooting silky web into the air, and let out a horrible scream. The surrounding spiders followed Aragogs example, and let out a series of scared clicking noises before they all quickly scurried off in various directions. Aragog, however, went in the exact direction Harry wanted him to go: right towards the school.
Harry tried to run after Aragog, but his eight legs allowed him to go much faster. The enormous ring was also becoming heavier every second, not helping Harry run any faster.
I need some support! he yelled to Ron and Hermione. They immediately sprang up to his side, and shot out some magical cushions underneath the basilisk. Hermione and Ron now sprinted alongside Harry, who was going much faster due to the cushions that drastically decreased the weight of the massive watch. 
While he was sprinting, Harry had several near misses with trees, and every second something brushed up against him, and most of the time, it was not a soft thing. 
Ow! yelled Harry as a giant thorn scraped his left arm. Blood started spilling out all over. He had to resist the urge to grab the wound with his right hand, that was the arm on which the watch was, and if he moved it, Aragog might change direction. 
The closer they got to Hogwarts, the faster it seemed Aragog moved. The noise that Aragog made was like a stampeding herd of elephants.
Light circle! Why have you forsaken us!? Aragog called to the sky. His voice was like scissors opening and closing. Harry assumed he was talking about the moon letting a basilisk get to him. He hoped that this incident wouldnt hurt the spiders and their religion too much; they might give up all their beliefs just because of this one incident.
They soon were out of the forest, and Harry saw the castle just ahead.
Ron! yelled Harry. You go to the left and make sure Aragog keeps going straight! Hermione! You go to the right! They obeyed him, and split off. Each of them were shooting small sparks out of their wands keeping Aragog on the track of heading to the castle. The main entrance to the castle was getting closer and closer, and Harry could feel the running finally catching up with him. He was beginning to feel winded. 
Cant stop now, Harry thought to himself as he was just a little more than five hundred feet from the doors. Aragog made a sudden swerve to the right, but Hermione shot some large sparks as him, pushing him back to the center. Suddenly, a thought came to Harry. Aragog was blind, he wouldnt know that there were doors in his way! Hed just slam right into them, causing the entire school to come out and see himself, Ron, and Hermione. 
Harry stopped running, about one hundred feet from the school. Ron and Hermione looked at him, but he signaled to them to keep going. Just before Aragog was about to hit the door, and was going up the stairs, it was time for Harry to act.
Anigo Tora! he yelled. A large yellow beam shot out of Harrys wand, aimed at the door. It hit the handle, and the doors swung open, just a few seconds before Aragog would have hit them. Aragog ran inside the doors, and all that there was left to do was wait until he entered the Great Hall. When the doors shut, Ron and Hermione stopped running, and started walking back to Harry.
Great jobs guys, said Harry to Ron and Hermione. Now all we have to- Harry was suddenly cut off by an ear shattering scream that soon lead to hundreds more. It sounded like a torture chamber inside the school, screams were coming from everywhere. 
Oh, I hope no one gets hurt! said Hermione as lights started shooting out of the castle. Some people were trying to stop Aragog with magic. 
Weve got to go now! said Ron. Before our distraction wears off! Harry nodded, and he took out his Firebolt from his backpack. He gave it to Ron and Hermione. Ron shrunk down to the size of a chameleon, and Hermione picked him up. She mounted the broom, nervously, and started going up in the air. 
Harry, seeing that they were set, started transforming his shoulder blades into wings. He felt his bones expanding, and growing. The two large blobs on his back hardened, and then white feathers burst out of them, forming perfect wings. Harry flapped them once, to see that they were okay, and then shot off, getting right next to Hermione within half a second. Harry immediately decided that flying over the forest was far easier than running through it. 
You okay Hermione? asked Harry. Hermione was shaking all over. Harry knew Hermione didnt especially enjoy flying, and this time was no exception.
Y- y- yeah! Im just fine! she stuttered back to Harry, keeping her face and eyes fixed directly ahead. Ron gave Harry a pint-sized thumbs-up too. So far, so good he thought. Harry took the map out of his backpack, avoiding hitting his wings which were flapping quite fast and powerfully. Looking at it, he saw that they still had a long trip ahead of them. The Forbidden Forest only took up a small fraction of the bottom of the map. Ahead there was a large body of water, another big forest, and then a giant green island which Azkaban was on. Harry put the map away, took a deep breath, and then continued on. 
* * * 
They stopped flying when Harry estimated that they were about halfway to Azkaban. They had been flying all trough the night, and several times, Harry felt as though he were asleep, but his wings were still flapping. Harry didnt want to take the chance that the next time that happened, his wings may stop flapping, and hed crash to the ground.
They landed in a small clearing in a giant forest, and set up a small camp, just as the sun was coming up, and animals all around them were waking. Harry and Ron worked on getting food while Hermione set up some magical tents that Harry had brought. They were extremely compact, about the size of a small book when in their state of maximum smallness, but when they expanded, they could reach the size of a house. 
Harry and Ron left Hermione to figure them out when they set out into the forest to try and find something to eat. They walked into the forest, wands out and ready to hit any animal that walked across their path. They just went a few paces in, when Ron asked Harry a question.
Harry, do you think were going to make it? he sounded like a little child, wondering if we were there yet. Harry, however, did not know how to answer, so he gave Ron a response that he wouldve given to a child that had asked that question.
Yeah Ron, of course, he said. Ron smiled back, and returned back to his work.. But, Harry wasnt sure at all that they would make it. Even though they made it halfway to Azkaban, they still had the other half to go, and then they had to get inside, and they still didnt have a good plan on how to do that. What made them think they could actually pull this off?
Just as Harry was contemplating this, he saw something that looked like a large bird rush by him. 
Ron! yelled Harry, pointing to where he saw the bird fly to. Over there! Rons head turned just in time to hear the sound of it flying by some leaves.
Lets go! yelled Ron, running after the bird. Man that thing is big! They ran after the bird, shooting some beams of light at it, hoping to stun it then kill it on the ground. The bird was moving extremely gracefully, flying through the trees and avoiding them as if it were swimming very fast through a sea of air. Every time Harry got close to it, he felt warmer, and the closer he got, the more he had to back away to escape its extreme heat. The bird made a quick swerve to the left, and suddenly, Harry realized that he only heard one set of running footsteps: his own. He stopped in his tracks, and looked around for Ron, but he was nowhere to be seen. The large bird had gotten way.
Ron! yelled Harry. He lit up his wand, and scanned the area. He was still gasping for breath after chasing the bird, and the sweat on his head from the birds heat was certainly not helping. Just then, Harry felt his foot slip into an immense hole. He just barely saved himself from slipping inside. Harry looked inside, and Ron was at the bottom.
Ron! Harry yelled to the bottom of the hole. Are you okay? Ron gave a low moan, and gave Harry a weak thumbs-up. 
Come on and get out, Harry said. Ron slowly stood up, and brushed himself off. Harry gave Ron his hand, and pulled him out of the hole. 
When did you fall in Ron? asked Harry.
I dont remember, said Ron. I just remember that the heat was really getting to me, then the bird turned to me, and it became unbearable. So I think I just fainted. Harry shook his head and sighed.
Come on Ron, said Harry. Lets go find something else.
Man, I really wanted that bird, it was so big, said Ron, scouting the area again for some animal. They started heading back to camp, where hopefully Hermione would share some of her rations with them that she had brought. Just when they were about to get back to the clearing that they had landed in, however, Harry felt the familiar warmth again.
Ron, do you feel that?
Yeah, said Ron, wiping his brow which was already starting to get wet. Harry felt the heat getting more and more intense. What is that bird? The same thought was running through Harrys mind, how was that bird producing heat?
Suddenly, a fireball flew over Harrys head, searing his hair. Harry screamed, and frantically searched for something to put the fire out. 
Aquaius! yelled Harry. A tiny sprout of water shot out of the tip of his wand like a small fountain. He poured it all over the top of his head, and there was a small hiss as smoke flew out of the his hair. Harry looked up and saw that what seared his head was not a fireball, it was a phoenix, only not a phoenix like Fawkes, it was a black Phoenix. 
Ron! Watch out! yelled Harry, trying to warn him about the phoenix. But, his warning was too late, the phoenix had already seared Rons head as well, only it was far worse than Harry had had it, his entire head was on fire. Harry ran over, and shot some more water on Ron who was screaming and twitching on the ground. Harry soon heard the hiss of the fire being put out, and saw some smoke. He helped Ron up, and looked around for the phoenix, but it was nowhere to be seen.
What was that Harry? asked Ron, tending to a few scars on his face.
It was a phoenix a black phoenix.
You mean, those phoenixes that were created by Veldomert? Harry nodded his head,
I saw one before it attacked Hedwig.
But what was this one doing here?
I dont know, said Harry. But I know that we should get out of here as fast as we can, if that phoenix returns, we could be in trouble. Ron nodded hastily in agreement, and they ran as fast as they could out of the forest, all the time wondering why the phoenix hadnt finished them off then, and constantly darting their heads in all directions around them for any sign of it.
When they burst out of the forest, panting, they met up with a very confused Hermione who was wondering why they were out of breath and looking paranoid. She was standing around and tending to a very large fire that already had some of the food she had brought with her on it.
Whats wrong? she asked them as she threw another log into the fire.
Its after us! yelled Ron, sounding insane, and, with his eyes darting all over, looked it as well.
What is? asked Hermione, starting to look slightly panicked.
A black phoenix, said Harry. This didnt seem to help Hermiones mood.
What? A black phoenix? Like the one you told us about? Oh no Harry, oh no.
Listen Hermione, said Harry, as long as we can eat quickly, and get out of here soon, we shouldnt be in any danger. I dont think the phoenix was after us, it never seemed like it was directing its attacks at us, we just got caught in the crossfire. Hermione looked slightly relieved.
But why was it here in the first place? asked Hermione. That thought never occurred to Harry, why was that phoenix there anyway?
I guess, maybe theres just some left over from when Veldomert created them, and theyre wandering the world now, said Harry. Hermione looked slightly satisfied with this answer, though not totally.
So should we get started on breakfast then? asked Ron, who already began eating some of the food that Hermione had set up. It was smelling quite good now, and it took Harrys mind off of the phoenix for a while, especially after he tasted it. After flying all night, and worrying about a killer bird, a full stomach really helped.
After a non-black phoenix filled breakfast and nap, it was time to set off. Hermione compacted the tents again, and put them into Harrys backpack. Ron shrunk down to the size of his chameleon, got with Hermione on the broom, and then shot off. Harry sprouted his wings, took one last look around for any sign of the phoenix, and then flew off next to Ron and Hermione.
* * *
It wasnt long before they reached the next stage of their journey, entering Azkaban. They flew all day, and seeing their destination finally appear, even if it was the condemned Azkaban, was a relief.
At first sight, Harry thought they had messed up and returned to Hogwarts. Azkaban looked exactly like it: an extremely large castle with many towers. Once they got closer though, Harry noticed several differences, first of which was a black outline around the castle. It looked like some sort of thin moat. However, upon closer inspection, it was revealed to not be water at all, but a long line of dementors. 
They were all constantly moving all over, making them appear like black water. However, they were not making the soothing a quiet sounds of water, they were all making clicking noises as they moved, bumping into each other and going in all directions at once.. 
Suddenly, Harry felt the familiar chill coming from the dementors. He felt the happiness slowly flowing out of him, like he was dripping it out. He immediately started focusing on a happy memory, and once again used his feeling that he had on his date with Cho. Nothing else even compared to that feeling. The leakage of happiness felt as though it was being plugged up.
Hermione, Ron, are you okay? asked Harry. They hadnt had as mush training in dealing with dementors as he had, and it was showing. Hermione had her eyes closed and was shivering, and the small Ron was doing the same. Harry decided it was time to take more serious defenses against the dementors. 
Expecto Patronum! he yelled. A giant silvery cloud popped out of Harrys wand, and it quickly transformed into a large stag. It hovered next to Harry, and he felt no coldness from the dementors at all. 
Are you guys okay? asked Harry to Ron and Hermione. The patronus had appeared to have helped: Hermione had opened her eyes and had stopped shivering and, from what he could tell, Ron had as well.
Lets land over there! yelled Harry to Ron and Hermione. He pointed to a small island off the coast of Azkabans. They landed there, and Harry and Ron returned back to their normal forms. The patronus hovered next to them, bobbing up and down, as if waiting for a command.
Alright said Harry. This is it. he pointed towards Azkaban and the sea of dementors that lay before them. Any ideas on how to get in? Hermione and Ron looked at each other.
We never really did plan this part too well, did we? asked Hermione. 
Well erm no said Harry. He felt really bad now, they always assumed they would get an idea on how to get in but now that they were actually there it seemed hopeless. Their entire trip so far would have been in vain if Harry didnt think of something quickly. 
We could copy one, and then try to persuade it suggested Ron.
No way Ron, said Hermione. Wed be lucky if we were able to copy one without arousing suspicion, and then for persuading it! Ha! Do dementors even speak English? And even if you could talk to it, what would you persuade it with? A kiss perhaps. Ron and Harry shuddered.
Harrys mind was racing, if that was the best idea they could come up with, then they were in trouble. He went over, in his mind, every spell he had ever learned, to see if any would help in this situation but it was to no avail. Nothing would help them.
We cant go around them, they surround the entire place, said Ron.
We cant go over them, that many dementors sucking the happiness out of you at once could practically kill you, said Hermione.
We cant go under them either, said Harry. Theres no way we could make a hole from under the island and into Azkaban without arousing suspicion. 
Harry was suddenly brought of his thinking by his patronus. It was sniffing him.
Get off! said Harry, nudging the silver stag, but it wouldnt move. Its nose was finding its way inside Harrys pocket. Get off! Harry yelled again, slightly louder, and pushing him harder, but the stag would still not budge.
Maybe it wants whats in your pocket Harry, said Ron. Maybe you still got some food in there from the forest. Harry reached inside, and heaved out everything that was inside. He examined it for anything that may have attracted the stag. All that was there, though, was a few quills, a spare ink jar, a few mirror-munchies left over, a few small candy frogs to give to Sirius and Lupin, and
Yes! yelled Harry so loud that everyone, even the stag, jumped. Ive got it! Harry threw everything to the ground, except the mirror-munchies which he held in his hand as though they were gold.
Whatd so great about those, Harry? asked Ron. Theyre just some of Fred and Georges stupid candy. Harry put a smirk on his face. 
Candy yes but in this case a tool. These candies will turn you into the closest living thing. So, if we eat one near the dementors, well turn into one, and then we can just waltz our way in disguised as dementors! Hermione and Rons eyes grew at least twice their size, and Hermione ran up and gave him a hug.
Harry! she yelled after hugging him. Youre brilliant!
Dont thank me, said Harry as he passed out the mirror-munchies, thank Weasleys Wizard Wheezes. Harry walked over to the stag, who was busy eating one of the chocolate frogs on the ground. Harry picked up the rest, and patted the stag on the mane.
Thanks boy! he whispered as Ron and Hermione started swimming over to the Azkaban island. Harry jumped in after them, and started swimming across as well. It was very difficult , especially with thick robes on. But, Harry eventually made it across and to the shore of the Azkaban island where the dementors noises were much louder. As they tried to suck the happiness out of Harry, he just kept reminding himself that he would soon be rescuing Sirius and Lupin, and everything would be good.
He kept reminding himself this all the way up to being face to face with a dementor. He looked over to his left, and saw Hermione with her candy out, and to his right, Ron, doing the same. 
Well eat them on three, said Harry, bringing his mirror-munchy out of his pocket. One two three! Harry popped the mirror-munchy into his mouth. 

Chapter 17- Azkaban
The mirror-munchy seemed to be expanding in his mouth. It withered its way down his throat like a snake, and landed in his stomach like a ball of lead. Harry collapsed to the ground under the extreme weight, and clutched his stomach which now felt like a giant slimy mass. It was growing larger and larger inside him, until it couldnt fit inside his anymore and the suddenly, it began coming out.
Its leaking out of my pores! yelled Hermione as clear liquid started flowing out of her. Its coming out of my skin! The same thing was happening to Harry, clear liquid was coming out of his skin all over.
Dont worry Hermione! yelled Harry, trying to stay calm. Its probably just part of the process! But Harry was not feeling to sure of this, the liquid was pouring out at an even faster rate, with more and more. Only it wasnt falling onto the ground, it was staying on his skin, like some sort of lotion. Harry was quickly covered in this fluid, and then he felt his body go rigid. The liquid, starting at his feet and working its way up, was changing color and texture, it was turning into black cloth. 
The liquid kept changing, all the way up to Harrys head. Instead of having his face turn into black cloth, however, Harry felt his face contort into what looked and felt like pimply sandpaper, the skin of a dementor. As the transforming skin reached his eyes, Harry retained them. This was odd, he thought, but then he remembered that Fred and George had made a mistake so that you kept your original eyes. He must have looked very odd, thought Harry to himself, a horrible dementor with bright green eyes.
As Harry felt some black cloth fall over his head, which was what he assumed was a hood, he felt his body become un-rigid. He got up to his feet (or what felt like feet, though Harry was sure he was floating in air) and tried to find some sign of Ron. But as he got up, a totally new sensation came over Harry, a new sense. He could sense happiness, joy, sadness, and death. Harry took a breath, and didnt feel air rushing through him, but warmth. The warmth of happiness. He could feel it flowing through his veins, and all throughout his body. It was a feeling that could only have been compared with Chos kiss, but this, Harry thought, was even better. 
Harry longed for another breath of pure joy, and he inhaled deeply. Only, this time, less joy spread throughout him. It was like taking a single short gasp rather than a long deep breath. Harry suddenly felt almost suffocated, he had to breathe in some joy. Harry ran frantically around, joining the mass of dementors, getting short gasps here and there, trying to feel full of it. All that mattered in life was sucking in happiness nothing else nothing else. Harry suddenly felt a hand on his shoulder.
He turned around, and saw a brown-eyed dementor, whose eyes he recognized as Hermiones. He shoved her off with a scabby hand, and returned to the mass of dementors, trying to suck in whatever happiness he could. Harry then felt two sets of arms on him, and saw that Ron had evidently assisted Hermione in attempting to subdue him. How was it that they were able to resist breathing?
Get off! I need to breathe! yelled Harry, only it came out as a series of clatters and clicks through his fanged and pimply mouth.
Come with us, said Hermione, also as a sequence of odd noises, but Harry understood it as if she had spoken it in English. They pulled Harry back a little, while he was gasping for breath, barely able to get a whiff of joy, it was getting harder and harder to breathe. He couldnt take in any air! He was suffocating.
Just when Harry thought he was going to asphyxiate, he felt a massive sense of happiness go through him, just like the first breath he had taken. He let it go all the way though him, and then exhaled cold and unhappy air. Wondering where this source of joy came from, Harry looked around for the source, and he saw the Stag Patronus. The closer Harry got to it, the more joy he felt flowing through him with every breath. Ron and Hermione were taking chattering breaths near it as well.
Why isnt the patronus driving us away? asked Harry. Patronuses were supposed to drive dementors away, not attract them. 
Well, were still not sure, said Ron, stroking the Patronus and drawing a deep breath. But we think that they only drive dementors away because Patronuses are like too much of a good thing for them, and since they dont know what they are because they cant see them, they get scared, and go away. But since we can see it and know what it is, it doesnt affect us. Hermione shook her head, as if disapproving of his too simple theory.
Oh well, lets go in, said Harry. Its time to rescue Sirius and Lupin! Ron and Hermione floated over to him, and Harry immediately noticed a problem.
What are we going to do about our eyes? asked Harry. Im sure any non-dementor guard will notice something is wrong with them. 
Hermione sighed, and pulled her hood down, covering most of her face, including her eyes. She looked exactly like a dementor should.
Common sense Harry, common sense! she said, waving a crusty finger at Harry. Ron and Harry pulled their hoods down, just enough so that they could see, but enough so that people couldnt see them.
So lets just nonchalantly float in, find Sirius and Lupins cell, and then rescue them. Got it? said Harry as all three of them formed a line. They nodded, and started working their way through the sea of dementors. After a few bumps and crashes, they came to the entrance of Azkaban. It was a huge door, at least the size of a bus, and it was made of a heavy dark metal. On the front, there were deep red words carved in, the letters were curved and pointy all over. The characters looked more like torture devices than letters of the alphabet.
All hope abandon, ye who enter here, read Harry off of the door. Sounds like a nice place, lets go in. He gave the doors a slight push, and to his surprise, they swung open, revealing a large open room. It was a pure-white room, except for one small brown desk in the middle, with a small bald man sitting at it, and several holes in the wall, appearing to be randomly scattered.
Lets stun him, and see if we can find some papers that say where Sirius and Lupin are, said Harry. Ron and Hermione agreed, and started to take out their wands. Then, suddenly, to Harrys surprise, the man stood up, and walked over to them, smiling. Harry saw that what he thought was a bald spot was actually a metal piece.
Oh good, youve finally arrived, said the man to the three of them. Harry was very confused, were they expecting him? Then, he suddenly felt panicked, did they know what their plan was? I must say, though, you were very quick to ship here not that I have any complaints about that. Then it hit Harry, the man evidently thought that the three of them were an order of dementors from some company.
This way please! said the man. He mounted a broom, and started to fly up into the air, and towards one of the holes in the wall. Harry floated up with him, and Ron and Hermione followed. Its just like walking, Harry thought, as he instinctively moved his tentacle-like legs that allowed him to hover. 
They entered the hole, which had a sign at the entrance that read Suicidals: Guard With Extreme Caution, and the most terrible sight Harry had ever seen came before his eyes. The hole was an entrance down a hallway that didnt seem to have an end. It was like a tunnel that someone who had a near death experience might see, only this tunnel did not end in any light, it was almost pitch black the entire way down. The only sounds were that of water (at least, what looked like water) dripping and moans, with the occasional scream. Dirty and skinny hands were protruding through the bars that separated the prisoners cells from the hallway. When Harry saw whom one of the hands belonged to, he thought he was going to be sick. A man with only one arm and half a leg stared back at Harry with his one good eye. His other was bloodshot and extremely inflamed. His skin was a deep green, and he had almost no hair left, unless you counted his extremely long beard that had bugs crawling in and out of it. The man suddenly threw up what looked like blood, and it hit the ground with a large splat. A group of rats immediately came up to the pile of bloody vomit, and started eating whatever was in it. The man picked one of the rats up, and bit its head off with a large crunch. 
Harry turned his face away from the man, he knew Azkaban was supposedly terrible, but never knew it could possibly be this horrific. As Harry hovered down the halls, and saw several more dementors, floating around, causing screams wherever they passed, only one thought came to Harrys mind.
This is Hell, he thought to himself as they passed another man who was desperately trying to keep his only eye from dripping out of its socket by holding it in with a spoon. They came to the end of the tunnel, and reached an intersecting hallway. The man turned right, and Harry followed, along with Ron and Hermione. This was another tunnel like the one they had just left, only this one had a sign that read: Newcomers. The man stopped there, and turned to the three of them.
Alright, were short on dementors in this section, and I need you three to guard this hallway, he said. Then he gave them a smile, This section is like a gold mine for you though. All the newbies usually have many fresh, happy memories for you. Especially these two we just got in about two months ago, theyre still pretty good. They both claim theyre innocent, and if you could maybe do them a bit more to break them down, thatd be great. He shot off of his broom, and was soon out of sight. Harry, Ron, and Hermione looked at each other.
Do you think that those two new ones he was talking about are Sirius and Lupin? asked Ron.
I think so, said Harry. He said he got them in about two months ago, and thats when they were found guilty. Lets look for them. Harry shot ahead of them, and started looking in each of the cells. These prisoners didnt look as though they had it as bad as the suicidals did. Most of them looked half-way decent, though they were huddled up in a corner of their cell, crying and shaking. Harry saw none that were standing up or sleeping, a sign that would tell him who Sirius and Lupin were; since they thought they were innocent, theyd retain their sanity, but the torture that Azkaban gave them would still make them almost unrecognizable. 
Harry heard Hermione call for them, though it wasnt a human yell, it was a very high pitched click. Harry and Ron ran over to her. She was pointing at a cell that had two people inside. One was writing something on the wall, and the other was standing there watching him. They both appeared malnourished, looking like little more than skeletons. Immediately, the one watching the other one write on the wall looked at Harry.
Hey look Sirius, theyve sent us some more to try and break us down! I guess they really want us gone, dont you? He gave a weak laugh. Harry tried to hold his breath, he didnt want to suck any happiness out of them.
They are Sirius and Lupin! yelled Ron.
Oh, talking to your friends now, on how to best destroy our minds? Well, I tell ya, nothing you do will work, nothing! yelled the same man again. When Harry tried to mentally erase some of the bruises all over his skin, the huge bags under his eyes, and added a bit more weight to him in his mind, he came up with a perfect image of Lupin. 
This was going to be difficult, thought Harry. How could they talk to them when they were dementors? Lupin glared at him, and Harry decided that a good way to start showing them who they were would be to prove that they werent really dementors. Harry lowered his hood, and Lupin stepped back ins surprise.
Hey Sirius! yelled Lupin. Come and tell me if Im crazy! Does that dementor have eyes!? Sirius stopped writing on the wall and came over, his eyes opened wide.
Those arent just any eyes Lupin, those are Lilys eyes! 
Lily? Lily! Is that you? asked Lupin, shaking the bars of the cell. Sirius came over and began shaking the bars as well, and banging his head against them as well. Both of them were going to kill themselves if the situation they were in did not improve.
Epistrefus! said Harry, taking out his wand and pointing it at himself. He felt the cloth and scabby skin all over him quickly turn back into the clear liquid and then it all fell off of him and onto the floor creating a large puddle that quickly disappeared. Ron and Hermione did the same. It was a very unusual and grotesque sight, seeing someones skin fall off like water. Sirius and Lupin must have thought this as well, because they were both gaping at the three of them, lost for words.
H- H Harry? stuttered Sirius.
Yes Sirius, its me, said Harry in a defiant tone. Were here to rescue you.
Harry! yelled Lupin, suddenly snapping back into reality. You shouldnt have come! You are in extreme danger!
Oh, dont worry, said Harry. We got past the dementors and everything easily. Sirius shook his head.
The dementors are the least of your worries Harry, said Sirius. Theres going to be an invasion here today!
An invasion? asked Harry, confused. By who?
Voldemort! yelled Lupin. Hermione and Ron flinched at the sound of the name.
What do you mean? asked Harry.
The dementors, said Sirius. Theyve been talking about it for weeks now. Theyre getting excited, they can sense him coming, and they are more than willing to join him.
You can understand them? asked Harry.
A translation charm, said Lupin. I made a wand out of the food and trays they give us. Every now and then they give us some dragon spice to put on our food. While not nearly as powerful as dragon heartstring, phoenix feather, or unicorn hair, it suffices. He took out a very crude wand form his pocket. Its definitely nothing spectacular, but it can do some basic stuff. 
Why didnt you tell any of the human guards? asked Hermione.
Ha! said Sirius, his arms folded. You think they listened to us? We tried, of course, but they thought we were just trying to come up with an excuse for them to let us out of here.
So get out of here Harry! said Lupin. Weve got a pretty good escape plan right now (he pointed to the writings on the wall) and we dont want you to get hurt when we try it. Harry felt distraught, he had traveled all this way, and they didnt even need or want his help. 
Not that were not thrilled that youre here Harry, said Sirius, giving a very thin and weak smile. Harry felt his spirits lift a little. The fact that you got passed the dementors and guards proves that you are a magnificent wizard.
So how can we get you out of here? asked Harry. Sirius and Lupin both pointed to a small hole in the wall that had a small white orb in it. There were bars covering it.
That little ball is the key to opening the cell, said Lupin.
The key is right there? said Hermione, sounding amazed. Right where almost anyone can get at it? Youd think they would make it a bit more secure than that.
They dont need to, Hermione, said Sirius. Most prisoners here dont even need bars to keep them in. Why waste governmental money on more security when you can get the same result for less?
Yeah, I guess so, said Hermione.
Anyway, continued Lupin, my wand isnt good enough to perform a transportation charm yet, but yours is.
A transportation charm? asked Harry, not knowing what it was.
It can move objects short distances as if they apparated, said Sirius. Just point to the orb, say Ela Grigorus. The orb should pop out of the cage and to you. Harry turned to the small cage in the wall, cracked his neck, and took out his wand, pointing it at the orb. Sirius and Lupin were as good as out.
Ela Grigorus! he yelled. The orb shook violently for a second, then it appeared in Harrys hand.
Excellent Harry! said Sirius. Now, put the orb in here, and get ready to go. He pointed to a small hole next to the bars of the cell. It was the exact size of the orb, and Harry put it snuggly into it. The bars of the cell immediately vanished, and Sirius and Lupin ran out. Harry took the orb from the hole, and the bars appeared again. He performed the transportation charm on it, and put it back into its cage. 
Great job Harry, said Sirius, beaming at him with extremely bloodshot and baggy eyes, just like Lupin. 
Now, how do we get out of here? asked Harry. 
Oh, thats the easy part, said Sirius. All we have to do is-
Sirius was cut off by a violent explosion that seemed to come from everywhere at once. The sound of it was deafening, and Harry could feel the heat of it coming from all around him. He heard screams coming from every direction, and heard beams being shot from wands. High, cold laughs followed each shot, along with huge explosive noises. Smoke began flowing throughout the halls, and right up to the five of them.
Its begun! said Sirius.
Go go go! yelled Lupin, pushing Harry, Ron, and Hermione along the smoky corridor. He was shooting something out of his homemade wand that made the smoke part a little, but it was still almost overwhelming. 
Where are we going? asked Harry, coughing, and putting his hand over his mouth.
Well, we had originally planned to go out through the main entrance, but since Voldemorts here, we dont stand a chance of surviving if we go that way whoa! Lupin tripped over a body on the floor. He quickly got back to his feet, and brushed himself off.
Thats Jack, this corridors human guard, said Sirius. If hes dead, Voldemort, or at least on of his servants, is around here somewhere.
Then we have got to get out of here quick! squeaked Hermione. 
My idea exactly! said Sirius. He was reaching into Jacks pocket, and he pulled out a small leather bag. 
Whats that? asked Ron, trying not to cough.
Floo powder, said Sirius. Azkabans corridors are linked through a system of fireplaces. Since you cant Apparate inside, the guards use Floo Power to get from one place to another quickly.
So what? asked Ron through a cough.
Come on Ron, use your brain, said Harry, catching on to what Sirius was talking about. We can use the powder to get out of here! We can use the Floo Powder to go right back to Hogwarts. 
Exactly! said Lupin, taking a handful of multicolored power from the bag. Now all we need is a fireplace. Scout around for one! Harry, Ron, and Hermione started walking down one direction of the corridor, and Sirius and Lupin started down the other.
See anything? asked Harry.
I can barely see my hand in this smoke, said Hermione.
Theres no way we can find a fireplace in this! said Ron. They wandered the hallway, trying to ignore the smells of the dead bodies around them. Suddenly, Harry heard footsteps coming from the opposite direction. They were coming closer and closer. Harry spun around, and took his wand out, the steps were coming faster now. Whoever was coming, it couldnt be anyone good, Harry had to do something.
Stupefy! yelled Harry. A beam shot out of his wand, and he heard one of the bodies hit the floor. The other body stopped running, and started dragging the other body. It soon came into focus who it was. It was Sirius. 
Harry! What did you do! he yelled as he dragged Lupins body behind him. Harry felt like an idiot. Theyre right behind us! Run!
Whos behind us? asked Harry.
Some Death Eaters and dementors, said Sirius as he picked up Lupins body, swing it over his shoulder, and started running with it.
Theyve already recruited them? asked Harry, running.
Oh yeah, said Sirius. Voldemort brought some fresh people with him, and the dementors just lapped them up. They joined him immediately afterwards when he said he could give them even more. Did you find a fireplace? Harry was about to answer when Hermione interrupted,
Theres one! she yelled, pointing straight ahead. At the intersection ahead there was a giant and very elegant furnace. It seemed to be made out of black marble, and was intricately carved with demonic figures that seemed to be popping out of the fireplace. The four of them stopped in front of it. Sirius took the bag of Floo Powder out of his pocket, and opened it. He took out a handful of the multicolored powder and offered it to Harry.
Go Harry, take it and go back to Hogwarts! Harry was about to take it when a thought came to him.
No, you go Sirius. Lupin needs immediate attention, a seconds delay may make a difference. Sirius looked for a second as though he was going to say something against Harrys statement, but instead shot a flame out of his wand and into the fireplace. He threw the powder into it making it turn green, and then gave the bag to Harry.
Dont send me any owls Harry, I dont want any risk of being caught. We think weve found the location of the last phoenix, but were not sure. Well contact you. He nodded at Harry, and yelled into the flames. Arabella Figgs House. He stepped into the flames and disappeared. 
The ceiling above Harry, Ron, and Hermione began to shake and stones fell from it. The smoke was thickening with the collapsing causing dust to fly everywhere. Harry quickly took some powder out of the bag, and threw it into the fire. Hermione and Ron came up to the flames.
Hogwarts, Gryffindor Common Room! yelled Hermione as she stepped into the flames and disappeared. Ron did the same, and Harry was left alone. 
Hogwarts, Gryffindor Common Room! he yelled as he stepped into the warm flames. The world around him melted away into a black oblivion, and it started spinning very fast. Then, just as soon as it started, Harry found himself in a large room. After he recovered from his dizziness, he looked around. 
This is not Hogwarts. Was the first thing to cross his mind. The room he was in was large, but it looked nothing like any Hogwarts room he knew of. The room was very dark, except for a few fireplace-shaped torches that were lit in the corners. There were old and dusty statues of witches and wizards all over, stacked on top of each other, as if no one cared about them anymore. From behind one of them, a dark figure appeared.
Ron, Hermione? Is that you? How did we get down here? he called out to the figure, but it did not respond. It continued to climb over the statues and come closer Harry realized it couldnt be Ron or Hermione, it was far too tall. Who are you? Harry called out, both hoping to get and not to get a response. He didnt get one.
The large dark figure stopped moving when it was a few feet away from Harry. It stood up in front of him, and crossed its arms. Its hood magically lowered itself, and Harry saw before him Wormtail.
So, Harry Potter we meet yet again hissed Wormtail through a very wide smile. My master will be very pleased when he discovers that I have you.
Suddenly, Harry remembered that the fireplace behind him was still lit. He quickly threw some Floo Powder into it.
Hogwarts, Gryffindor Common Room! he yelled, getting ready to step back into it. The fire quickly turned green.
Oh no you dont! Aquaius! yelled Wormtail. Just as Harry had stepped one of his feet, not the fire, it was immediately put out by the water that Wormtail created. All of Harrys hope went out in a quiet hiss.
You cant kill me Wormtail, gasped Harry, trying to recover from his failure. You may look stronger now, but I knew that inside, youre still the little weak man that turned in my mom and dad.
Wormtail gave quick laugh and shook his head.
Harry, Harry, Harry he said, you misunderstand my intentions. If I wanted to kill you, you would have been dead long ago. Accept the fact that I have not subdued you as a good intention. You see, my master no longer wishes to kill you he wants you to join us.
Never! yelled Harry immediately. Ill die before Ill ever join you! Wormtail laughed again.
Oh Harry, there are far worse things than death he snapped his fingers, and several more cloaked figures entered the room, Voldemorts servants, the Death Eaters. All of them, including Wormtail, formed a circle around Harry. Harry recognized some of them: Lucius Malfoy, Macnair, Crabbe, and Goyle. There were a few more that Harry didnt recognize, they must have just been rescued from Azkaban seeing from how they looked. Then, one member among them caught Harry by surprise.
Professor Snape? asked Harry, gaping at him. He was standing right next to Wormtail, as though they were best friends. What was going on?
Ah yes, Severus said Wormtail. He returned to us last summer. My master understood his delay in coming, he didnt want to draw any attention to himself by leaving Hogwarts so suddenly. He has been very helpful to us, especially in accomplishing this Azkaban invasion. 
Harry immediately understood, Professor Snape must be working undercover somehow. Harry didnt have time to figure it out, he had to find a way out of this predicament. 
Anyway Harry, said Wormtail, back to business He snapped his fingers again, and some dementors rose from the ground, as if floating up through the floor, and into the room.
Harry immediately felt their presence, felt the coldness of them flowing over him, felt the happiness being slowly sucked out of him, he had to act now.
Expecto Patronum! yelled Harry. The silver stag shot out of his wand, and straight at the dementors. But, the dementors were not driven back. The stag did nothing to stop them. Harry then saw why they were acting this way: they had eyes. They did not have eyes like humans, but eyes like Voldemorts, black and snake-like with red pupils. They were like black holes, appearing to be sucking even more happiness out of the air.
Wormtail waved his hand, and the patronus was gone.
You see Harry? Lord Voldemort always rewards his faithful, he said in an almost soothing voice. Sight, Harry, is a very powerful gift. Imagine, all your life living in a black void, incapable of experiencing anything to its best. A dementors life is worse than those of its victims, at least they had happy memories. Dementors never had and never will have even one, until now. His speech almost made Harry feel sorry for the dementors, but he quickly shook it off.
Without your silly little patronus spell to drive them off, the dementors will be almost invincible, hissed Wormtail. Join us Harry, join us and my master will reward you like he has done to the dementors, like he will to the ones rescued from Azkaban. Join us Harry and you will becomes more powerful than you could ever imagine
It seemed hopeless. Every second, Harry was losing more and more happiness, and the screams and terror inside his mind was expanding, almost to the point of being painful. He was tempted to give in, to join Voldemort but he remembered what Dumbledore had told him at the end of last year to choose what is right over what is easy. The memory of Dumbledore flowed through him, and he felt strong again.
No, Wormtail never, he spat. Wormtail gave a weak laugh, shrugged his shoulders, and shook his head.
I dont think were seeing eye to eye here Harry you see, Im giving you no choice. You will join us. 
Harry had to escape but how? Death Eaters were all around him, and Dementors were everywhere the Death Eaters werent. Then Harry remembered Snape, what was his role in this? Was he really with Voldemort, or was he just spying? Harry had to stall for some time to figure all this out.
So where is Voldemort anyway, Wormtail? Is he too scared to show up at his own invasion? Wormtail glared at Harry.
This may be beyond your comprehension, Harry, but this little invasion here is nothing compared to the other business my master has to take care of. Covering it all up, gaining power, inventing new and more powerful spells, yes he is truly a genius.
If hes not here, said Harry, then how did the dementors get their eyes? Isnt that too difficult of a spell to use?
By no means, no, said Wormtail. My master is great, Harry. He has found ways to make spells take so little energy that even a child could use the most powerful of them. However, even with this magical compression, there are some spells that he is unable to perform still, even with his own, personal massive amount of magical power. He still needs more.
Harry shuddered at the thought of what those new spells could be. 
So Wormtail, how did you, that is Voldemort and company, plan all this out? I mean, entering and taking over Azkaban is no easy feat. Wormtail gave Harry a small smile.
It took much planning Harry, and much work. We first had to get a few dementors on my side. They planted magical explosives all over Azkaban so that when we came in, it would be announced in a giant chaotic explosion. Getting you, though, Harry to come, was far more difficult.
What do you mean? I came here on my own will.
Oh Harry, kind people are so easy to manipulate, they are so predictable. My master blackmailed old Cornelius Fudge, and he made sure Sirius Black and Remus Lupin were sent to Azkaban. There was enough evidence to prove them innocent, so he had to take action. He knew that you would come to their rescue, he just didnt know when. So, he sent out a few watchmen all over from Hogwarts to Azkaban, to tell him when you were coming. When one of them saw you, he immediately started making the final preparations, and then sent us in.
What about the fireplace thing? Bringing me here instead of Hogwarts, how did you do that?
That, said Wormtail, was actually up to me. I knew that you were too noble to let yourself through first, so all I had to do was wait for the last person to go through the fireplace, and then reroute the network to this room. So simple, and yet it worked so well.
Just then, Harry noticed Snape. He was pointing a single finger, from under his robes, to one of the furnace-shaped torches in the corner of the room. Harry gave a quick glance at it, and then turned his attention back to Snape. He mouthed the word, Floo.
Harry understood. All he had to do was transport the torch over to him, quickly throw some Floo Powder inside it, and then just say the magic words. But was that torch, being so small and not even really a furnace, be hooked up to the Floo Network? Harry had to, for the first time in his life, trust Snape. 
Even though this plan had so many variables where so many things could go wrong, it was nothing compared to the one he, Ron, and Hermione had just pulled off well, that Ron and Hermione had pulled off anyway. After accomplishing that impossible task, everything else seemed easy: including this one. Besides, it was Harrys only hope of escape. 
Harry reached into his back pocket, and took a tiny bit of powder, barely a pinch, and held it between his fingers, getting ready to throw it into the torch. He had to wait for just the right time to do it.
Well Harry, what is it going to be? asked Wormtail. Are you ready to go, and begin your life as one of the most powerful wizards on earth?
Well Voldemort, Ive thought it over, and Id have to say is Ela Grigorus! Wormtail gave him a confused look, but before he could say anything, the torch was in Harrys hands. He immediately threw the tiny bit of powder into the flame, and it turned green. 
Hogwarts, Gryffindor Common Room! yelled Harry.
NO! yelled Wormtail, running towards Harry and trying to grab onto him. But, it was too late for him. Harry felt himself being shrunk, sucked into the furnace, and then returning to Hogwarts. 

Chapter 18- Back To Hogwarts
The world around Harry once again turned black and started spinning. Faster and faster, until he stepped out of a fireplace, and into another room. Harry quickly looked around, to make sure he was back at Hogwarts, or at least not back in that room with Voldemort.
To his relief, Harry saw he was in the Gryffindor common room. It was almost completely empty, except for two figures: Ron and Hermione. They immediately ran from across the room, and to over to Harry.
Harry! yelled Hermione, sounding worried and looking as though she had been crying. Are you okay? Harry nodded, his mind racing over what had just happened.
Where did you go Harry? asked Ron. You obviously didnt turn up here, where did you end up? Harry told them the whole story of how Wormtail had changed where his fireplace led, and what he had told him, about wanting Harry to join Voldemort. He told them about how Snape was there, and he told him to use to Floo Powder to escape. 
So Snape was with them the whole time! said Hermione.
I knew he was no good! said Ron.
No Ron, said Harry. Snape has been working as a spy for Dumbledore. 
Oh, said Ron, looking slightly embarrassed. The large clock in the room suddenly struck two in the morning. 
Oh man! said Ron. Weve got to get to bed! We have a Quidditch game tomorrow, Harry! Harry made a grunting noise, and put his head into his folded arms. How could he have forgotten? How were he and Ron supposed to play their best while they were half asleep? Harry just hoped their clones had done a good job at the strategy meeting they were supposed to have last night. 
That reminds me! said Harry, louder than he had hoped. Weve got to get rid of our clones!
As if one cue, Ron and Harrys clones came down the steps from their dormitories. They were both in their nightclothes, and looking extremely tired, rubbing their eyes.
Be quiet will you? yawned Rons clone. Harry, Ron, and Hermione stared at them.
Oh no, you, said Harrys clone, walking over to them. Rons clone followed. Harry sighed, he remembered how hard this type of situation had been before, and was not anxious to go thorough it again.
Listen, I know this will come as a surprise to you, but you guys are-
Clones? asked Harrys copy, his arm folded. Harrys eyes widened, and he blinked several times.
What? You mean you know?
Of course I, that is we know, said Harrys clone. 
How do you know? How did you figure it out? asked Ron.
Well, after you left, we started getting more of our memory back, said Rons clone. One of the memories was of you creating us, not us creating you.
To test the theory that we were the clones, said Harrys copy, we used Prori Incanatem on my wand. Since spells and magic are not matter, they wouldnt have been copied. The copies would have no prior spells, but the originals would. When an Engorgio spell, or any spell for that matter, didnt come out, we realized the truth.
And, are you okay with that? asked Harry.
Of course not! said his clone. Do you think we want to go? Do you think we want to die?
What do you mean die? asked Hermione.
Well, there cant be two of each of you wandering around the planet can there? spat Harrys clone, looking almost furious. 
So only one set of us, the clones or the originals, can stay, said Harry, realizing that getting rid of the clones was not like putting away a toy, it was like killing a fellow human. I never realized
Imagine, said Harrys clone, being born, living for two days, then dying. What a life, huh? Harry felt worse and worse every second, he wished he could have come up with some other way of not letting people know he, Ron, and Hermione were gone besides using clones of themselves. 
Well, theres no other way- started Ron.
Shut up! yelled Ron and Harrys clones. Just, shut up!
Well one of us has got to go, said Ron, sounding annoyed, and its not going to be us! 
Oh, what makes you so special that youre the originals? asked Rons clone. Were the same as you! 
No youre not, said Harry, understanding a large difference between them and the clones. You said magic cannot be copied, right?
Yeah, so? said his clone.
That means my Order wouldnt have been copied into you, said Harry. Unless you go and I stay, my mom wont be brought back to life, and she will be fair game for Voldemort to take His clone looked as though he were about to make an argument, but then realized that Harry was right.
You are correct, he said, slowly and quietly. We are the ones who have to go. He walked backwards, up to the fireplace that Harry had just come out of. He put his hands up in the air, and closed his eyes.
Do it, he said quickly and quietly. 
Do what? asked Harry.
Kill me, use the Killing Curse, make it quick, he said, not moving and not opening his eyes.
What? asked Harry, astounded. I cant do that to you! Harrys clone put his hands down, and opened his eyes.
Well then, what do you expect to do?
I thought there would be some kind of spell, to make you go away, quickly, said Harry. His clone laughed.
You just described the Avada Kedavra curse! Harry, amazed at his own stupidity, banged his forehead.
No, there just has to be some other way, yelled Harry. He didnt want to kill anyone, even if they werent anyone. Suddenly, the door to the common room opened. The room was flooded with light, and Professor McGonagall came in.
Run! Quick! yelled Harry at the clones, but it was too late, they had already been seen. Professor McGonagall gave a shriek.
Potter! Weasley! Granger! What is going on here!? she yelled at the three of them. They stared at her for a minute, and then Hermiones clone came down the stairs in her nightgown. The had her eyes close, and was rubbing one of them with her hand.
Whats all the noise for? she asked. Then, looking up to see Harry, Ron, her original (Hermione) and Professor McGonagall, a look of fear came upon her face. She ran over to the Harry and Ron clones, and looked much more awake.
Your situation did not just improve, said Professor McGonagall to Harry. Why are there two of you?
Well professor started Harry. He decided to go back to his original story that he, Ron, and Hermione had created them as copies for one of their dates to go with to a dance. Professor McGonagall didnt buy this story as easily as the others did.
There have been no dances announced Mr. Potter, she said. What made you think there was one? 
Harry should have expect that. Of course a Hogwarts teacher would know that there were no planned dances! Seeing that he was having trouble, Ron spoke.
There was a rumor, he blurted out. A rumor that a dance was coming up. I guess our dates just wanted to be sure they had us! He gave a weak laugh, and Harry and Hermione tried to join in, but they were too worried about what Professor McGonagalls reaction was going to be. 
I cannot imagine anything more foolish than what you did, she said. After the spider attack two days ago, you would think that people would be more alert in what they do! How long have you had these clones?
Just a few hours, lied Harry.
Well then, no serious damage could have been done. Why are you making so much racket then?
Well, we realized that we have no way to get rid of them once were done with them, said Harry. We dont want to kill them, and they cant stay, so were stuck. Professor McGonagall shook her head.
You three, well six rather, have no idea how many times this predicament has come up, especially in this school.
You mean this has happened before? asked Harry, curious.
Oh, countless times! she exclaimed. In fact, the year just before you three arrived, we had a situation exactly like this.
Well what did you do? asked Hermione.
We sent the clones off to the Ministry of Cloning of course! she said.
Whats that? asked Harry.
They keep clones of people there. They watch over them, and let them live out their natural lives as best they can. They sometimes change their appearance, and send them out into the world if they think they can handle it.
I dont want to be sent to some kind of zoo! said Harrys clone. Where Im changed around and evaluated!
Would you rather die then? asked Professor McGonagall. Harrys clone immediately closed his mouth, and shook his head.
Well then, we should try and get you out of here as soon as possible, we dont want another panic. You three, she pointed to the clones, see me in my office in a few minutes, I will have the Knight Bus ready. She walked out of the common room, but before she stepped out, Weasley and Potter! Get to bed now! You have a game tomorrow! She closed the door.
Well then, said Harrys clone, I guess this is goodbye.
Im really sorry, said Harry.
No, dont be, said his clone. While my existence may only be only a copy of another, I at least have an existence, and I can be thankful for that.
That response took Harry by surprise, and he didnt say anything as his, Rons and Hermiones clone walked out of the common room to Professor McGonagalls office. When the door closed, Ron gave a sigh a relief.
Oh man, am I glad that went well, he said.
I cant believe I didnt remember about the Ministry of Cloning, said Hermione. Even though theyre not too well known, I still should have remembered. I guess I have to study my History of Magic more.
Harry and Ron shook their heads, and walked up to their dormitories. Harry got dressed, and collapsed on his bed. As he did, he heard something crinkle, and dreaded what it was. He got up, and saw that he landed on a piece of parchment. Harry picked it up, and read it. It said: I still know what you did, Potter, and youll pay for it tomorrow. 
Harry groaned, crumpled up the paper, and collapsed on his bed again, falling asleep almost immediately.
* * * 
Harry woke up to Rons violent shakings, and his yelling. By the time he finally got out of bed, he had only twenty minutes until their match against Slytherin. He had to endure Malfoys torments throughout his quick breakfast, and then ran down to the Quidditch field. A few people were already in the stands, getting the good seats, and the rest of the Gryffindor team was there. The entire Slytherin team was on the other side, huddled together, producing some sort of strategy.
Harry! yelled George, brandishing an envelope. This came for you just before we got here. It was on the ground. He handed Harry the envelope, and Harry tore it open. It read:
Dear Harry,
How have you been? I havent seen you much since our date to Hogsmeade, and I would like to catch up on what we missed. After you win the match against Slytherin, meet me inside the Great Hall. We can talk about a dance thats rumored is coming up, and the Dueling Club, which I am anxious to join.
Lots of love,
Cho
The letter was just what Harry needed. He immediately felt better about his match, and was ready to go. The promise of seeing Cho afterwards gave him renewed happiness.
You okay Harry? asked Fred, seeing Harrys dazed expression.
What? Oh, yeah! Lets go! said Harry, stuffing the letter in his pocket and walking out to the middle of the field. Marcus Flint came up to Harry from his side, and glared down at Harry. He was like a younger version of Hagrid. He was extremely large, bulky, and muscley, but he didnt have any of Hagrids ever present warmth and joy.
Shake hands captains, said Madam Hooch, the referee. Harry immediately shot his hand out, and Flint grabbed it as if it was a bug he wanted to crush. He squeezed it so hard, Harry was surprised his hand didnt explode. All the while, Flint had a smile on his face. 
Mount your brooms, said Madam Hooch. Flint let go of Harrys hand, and Harry started rubbing it to try and get rid of the throbbing pain. He mounted his broom, and the rest of the team came up next to him. 
One two said Madam Hooch with the Quaffle, Bludgers and Snitch in her hands, ready to be thrown up, three! She tossed all three into the air, and Harry immediately shot after the Snitch, trying to stay with it, but it flew out of sight within half a second.
What, is the Snitch too fast for you Potter? yelled Malfoy from his broom.
I didnt see you anywhere near it Malfoy! yelled Harry back, and zooming off before Malfoy could say anything. Just as he was flying away, though, he felt a sharp pain in the back of his head, as though a Bludger had just hit him.
Ow! Fred, George, where are you?!
Sorry Harry! yelled Fred, flying by. I didnt know we had to keep an eye on Quaffles too!
What? 
That was a Quaffle that hit you Harry, not a Bludger and- watch out! the Quaffle was zooming back towards Harry, and he just barely moved aside, doing it.
Whats going on? yelled Harry. Just as the Quaffle flew by him, it stopped, turned around, and shot back towards him. Theres something wrong with this Quaffle!
It was true, the Quaffle wasnt going anywhere on the field except around Harry. It seemed to be trying to hit him, but that was what Bludgers were supposed to do.
What should we do? asked George, coming over to try and help.
Hit it! yelled Harry. George soared over to the Quaffle, which was on its way back to hit Harry, and whacked it with all his strength. But, for all the good his hit did, he might as well have used a feather. His bat did not stop the Quaffle in the least. It was still on a collision course with Harry.
Keep moving Harry! yelled Angelina. The entire Gryffindor team was surrounding Harry now, and the Slytherin team was gathered at the other end, laughing. If you keep moving, it may not get you!
Harry took her advice, and shot off in whatever direction he was able to go. The Quaffle chased after him, and it was not slowing down. What was going on? Harry looked through the entire Slytherin stands, to see if anyone was jinxing the Quaffle. He saw them cheering for Harry to fall, but none of them were keeping eye contact with the ball and muttering, a sign that jinxing is occurring. 
Harry had to find the Snitch, and quickly. The Quaffle was speeding up, about to collide with Harry again. 
Having a bit of ball trouble there Potter? came Malfoys voice. He was right next to Harry.
I dont have time for you Malfoy, said Harry, quickly swerving to the side, getting away from him. 
Well, we have a rather dull game of Quidditch going on here, came Lee Jordans voice. Since no one is able to get the Quaffle, all eyes are on the Seekers, and- watch out Harry!
The Quaffle shot forward and hit Harry on the side. He felt as though he was hit by a car. He could feel his ribs breaking, and blood spilling out inside him. It was far too painful to even yell. He clutched his side, trying to keep it intact, when the Quaffle came back for another hit. 
Harry managed to avoid this one, but the pain from the previous one was still excruciating. Harry did, however, manage to yell, Time out!
Madame Hooch blew her whistle, and the two teams came to the ground. Harry wobbled over to his team, wincing with every step.
Harry! yelled Katie. Are you okay?
No, not really, said Harry. 
You should go to Madam Pomfrey, Harry, said George. We should forfeit the match.
No way! said Harry. Im not losing my first match against Slytherin as team captain just because of a little internal bleeding. All I need is a temporary fix. Harry took his wand out of his pocket and pointed it at his side.
Osteo Repairo, he said through gritted teeth. He could feel his bones rearranging themselves inside him, and the pain subsided. 
That should keep the bones okay, Harry, said Alicia, but youll need some help for the internal bleeding. 
After the match, said Harry quickly, he didnt want to show any sign of weakness. He mounted his broom, and flew back up. The rest of his team and the Slytherins did the same.
After a short time-out, the teams are back in the air, said Lee. Madam Hooch has replaced all the balls as well, that last Quaffle was a little insane.
Harry breathed a huge sigh of relief at this announcement, the crazy Quaffle would no longer be in the arena. The game could hopefully continue as normal. 
And the Quaffle is in the air with Slytherin in possession, groaned Lee as the Slytherin crowd cheered. All Harry could do now was look out for the Snitch. 
The Slytherin team is nearing the Gryffindor goal posts, hurry up Angelina, steal the ball! Oh no! Its too late! Ten to nothing, Slytherin. The Slytherin stands cheered while Gryffindor, Ravenclaw, and Hufflepuff groaned. 
Just then, by the Slytherin goal posts, Harry saw the familiar shimmer of gold, the Snitch. But, he was distracted by Lees announcement:
Whats going on? The Quaffle is going in and out of the Gryffindor goal posts! Twenty to nothing, thirty whats going on?
Harry looked over at the opposition of the field. The Quaffle was going in and out of the same Gryffindor goal, scoring Slytherin ten points each time.
Forty to nothing, fifty! came Lee Jordans voice again. Harry had to catch the Snitch quickly, before Slytherin got too many points. He turned back to the Slytherin goal posts, and saw that the Snitch was still there, hovering in the same spot, as if watching the match.
Sixty to nothing!
Harry shot towards the Snitch, it was pretty far away, would he get there in time?
Seventy to nothing!
Harry was getting closer
Eighty to nothing!
The Slytherin Keeper had just noticed Harry coming in.
Ninety to nothing!
The Keeper flew towards Harry, trying to block him.
One hundred to nothing!
Harry made a quick direction change to avoid the Keeper.
One hundred ten to nothing!
He shot past the Keeper, and could almost reach the Snitch.
One hundred twenty to nothing! Do something Gryffindor!
Just as Harry was about to grab the Snitch, it moved slightly to the side.
One hundred thirty to nothing!
Harry turned to the right, and one of his fingers touched the cold, hard, Snitch.
One hundred forty to nothing!
Harrys fingers wrapped around the round Snitch. He felt it flutter and vibrate and try to get free, but Harry held on to it tight.
Whats this!? Harry Potters caught the Snitch! yelled Lee Jordan. The Gryffindor stands erupted into applause. Gryffindor wins! Gryffindor wins! One hundred fifty to one hundred forty!
Harry soared to the ground and held the Snitch high in the air. The rest of the Gryffindor team came running up to him and started cheering, Harry! Harry! Harry! The rest of the crowd joined in in cheering Harrys name, everyone except the Slytherins anyway. The cheering continued all the way up to the Gryffindor common room where it turned into a party. Madam Pomfrey came into the common room, and tended to Harrys room as quickly as she could. She mumbled something about youth and not caring about injuries properly, but Harry was too busy having fun to listen or worry about the crazy Quaffles too much. 
Harry, both fortunately and unfortunately, had to leave early to go see Cho. He had to fight his way through the crowd in the common room to get to the door, and had to fight even harder to get through the door, people didnt want him to leave.
But, he eventually did get through the masses, and quickly arrived at the Great Hall. Cho wasnt anywhere to be seen, so Harry sat down at the Ravenclaw table to wait for her. Just when he sat down though, she came in.
It was as if she radiated an aura of beauty wherever she went, thought Harry as she came into the room. Even though she was in her normal black Hogwarts, and didnt have any makeup on, or had her hair done in any special way, she was still the most gorgeous creature Harry had ever seen. How could someone as great as her like me? thought Harry.
She looked around the Great Hall, and when she spotted Harry, her mouth turned into a giant smile which she beamed straight at Harry. Harry gave a weak smile back as she ran over to him. 
Oh Harry! she squeaked when she sat down. Great job during the game! I cant believe you got that Snitch so fast! Harry didnt know what to say, he didnt want to say anything that would sound as though he was bragging since Cho was the Ravenclaw Seeker, so he just said,
Thanks.
Harry, she continued, I overheard Professor McGonagall talking to Professor Dumbledore the other day. She said something about a dance, and a rumor, and something else, but would you like to go to the dance with me? 
Harry was overcome with joy. He was going to go to the dance with Cho! But, then he thought, would there really be one? Was the dance rumor that Cho overheard just the story he had made up to get Professor McGonagall to do something about the clones? Either way, Harry was happy.
Of course, said Harry. Id love to. Cho gave a small giggle.
I cant wait! she said. Now, about the Dueling Club youre starting I know you were in it before, so youve had more experience than me. Harry laughed on the inside. The Dueling Club during his second year was little more than a joke. Do you think we could get together after classes and practice?
Harry was about to say yes when he remembered his Animagus lessons. He already had those after his classes. 
Um, how about a little later Cho, said Harry. I uh always have lots of homework, what with the O.W.L.s coming up.
Okay Harry, said Cho. And about the O.W.L.s, dont worry too much about them, theyre not nearly as difficult as people make them out to be. They mostly only test you on stuff you learned your fifth year.
I hope so, said Harry. So Ill see you tomorrow, here, around nine?
Sounds good, said Cho as she and Harry stood up. Cho gave him a kiss, then walked back up to the Ravenclaw common room. 
Harry ran back to the Gryffindor room, where the party was still going on, and showing no sign of slowing down. Harry found Ron and Hermione, told them about his new plans, and joined the party. Finally, at about midnight, the party was over, and people went to bed to get ready for school tomorrow.
Harry went to bed that night feeling as though he were the happiest person on Earth. He had just won a Quidditch match, he was going to the dance with Cho, he was going to probably be head of a Dueling Club, and Sirius and Lupin were free, looking for a phoenix to help Harry see his mom again. He collapsed on his bed, crumpling up and throwing out the note under his pillow without even looking at it. He was in such a good mood, he didnt even want to try and risk it by reading the note.


Chapter 19- The New Dueling Club
Harry woke up the nest morning still feeling happy, and went down to the Great Hall for breakfast, eager to get back to classes. When he came down, he was surprised to see Malfoy and a few other Slytherins crowded around a newspaper, grinning. Shouldnt they be sulking about their loss? 
What are they so happy about? asked Harry as he sat down next to Hermione and Ron.
Theyre reading about the attack on Azkaban over the newspaper, said Ron, biting into his piece of toast. 
I hope theres nothing in the article about us, said Harry.
Dont worry, said Hermione who had a copy of the newspaper, there isnt. She handed it to Harry. He read it to himself:
Azkaban Attacked!
Last Saturday, the largest, and supposedly most secure, wizard prison in all of Europe was broken into and destroyed. Since there are no eyewitnesses to this crime, exact information is still sketchy. The only person, it seems, who knows what is going on is former Minister of Magic, Cornelius Fudge, who admits to have been covering up attacks by You-Know-Who since last June.
Hed been planning it for months, Fudge is to have said at his resignation. You-Know-Who had communication with the dementors. He told them to plant explosives all over, to destroy the entire place, allowing his Death Eaters to just walk right in, and free his imprisoned followers. And that is just what happened. All criminals convicted of following You-Know-Who were freed, and are now wandering the country with him. All other prisoners are reported dead or missing.
The election for the new Minister of Magic will be held all day tomorrow. All ranking wizards are required to arrive, all other wizards of voting age are encouraged to come and vote as well. 
Cornelius Fudge resigned as Minister of Magic? asked Harry after waiting a few seconds to take in what hed read.
Oh yeah, said Ron. Its been all over the Wizard News lately.
He admitted to covering up You-Know-Whos attacks, said Hermione, looking over her Transfiguration book. He said his reason for doing it was so that there wouldnt be a panic, but everyone knows he shouldve said the truth anyway. Weve lost a lot of time that we couldve been using to get You-Know-Who and stop his attacks, especially the Azkaban raid. The people were so angry at him that he decided to resign before he was thrown out.
So whos going to replace him? asked Harry.
Thats whats the election for, said Ron. I think the candidates are the head of the Improper Use of Magic Office: Mafalda Hopkirk, Dumbledore, of course, some other guy Elbiret Mann, I think hes the head of Invention of New Spells office, and some other guy Zac Peeples I think some nobody.
So whos going to win? asked Harry.
Well, probably Dumbledore, said Hermione, not looking up from her book. Though Elbiret is a close match. Hes come up with some excellent spells that have saved peoples lives.
Ah yes, Elbiret. Hes the one who improved the weather charms to include raining cats and dogs, one of my most favorites.
Harry turned around to see who was talking to him, and saw tiny Professor Flitwick.
Oh hello professor, said Harry, wondering why he was there. 
Harry, said Professor Flitwick, I need to talk to you about the Dueling Club meeting this Friday. I liked the idea you gave me the other day about having a tournament to see who the captain will be, and then having contests every week or so. Do you still want to do that?
Um, sure, said Harry. His clone must have talked to Professor Flitwick about it. 
Oh excellent! he said happily. Just making sure, you know. Have to make plans to get this thing to work. Should be exciting! Professor Flitwick walked away, skipping every other step.
Wow, hes really excited about the club, said Harry, turning back to Ron and Hermione. 
Well, he was dueling champion at his time, I bet he wants to show off his skill again, said Ron, finally finishing his breakfast. Just then, the ten minute warning bell rang, and Harry, Ron, and Hermione set off for their classes.
Compared to their adventure the last weekend, classes were downright dull. The only class that came close to the excitement they had was Care of Magical Creatures. Their dragons had grown considerably over the last week, and were now the size of large dogs. Harrys Hungarian Horntail dragged him off the ground several times, and Hermiones Transylvanian Three-Headed Terror was chaotic. Each of its three heads was constantly biting and snipping at the others, trying to eat it off. It finally took a stunning spell from Hermione to stop them. 
Rons African Abysmall, however, was the most boring of all the dragons there. It was about two feet shorter than any other dragon there, and at least twice as wide. It reminded Harry of a dragon version of the old Dudley. All it did was sleep the entire class.
Come on! yelled Ron, poking his dragon with a stick. Wake up!
Wow Weasley, I guess the theory that the animals picks the wizard is true. A pathetic beast for a pathetic boy.
Shut up Malfoy, said Harry, using his usual comeback for Malfoys taunts. Malfoy had Crabbe and Goyle next to him, and what looked like another bodyguard, his Hungarian Horntail. Malfoys dragon was the biggest of all of the students. It stood erect rather than on all fours, and its red and black body was extremely muscular. Its fangs were so large, when it closed its mouth, they still poked out. The s tail looked like a pitchfork, only much sharper. Malfoy was stroking its spiky back, getting a small puncture in his hand every now and then.
Of course, my dragon here is proof as well, he snickered. 
The bell for the next class rang, and Harry held back Ron as he was about to throw himself on Malfoy. 
Some day, some day Ill get him! said Ron, holding himself back. 
Save your anger for the Dueling Club, Ron, said Harry. You can get him then.
The rest of the day went by quickly, and before Harry knew it, it was time for his Animagus lessons. Since Harry had the wings down perfectly, Professor McGonagall decided it was time to work on transforming the rest of his body. By then end of his lessons, Harry could transform his arms, and part of his mane. Hermione could transform the top of her head into the horn, and Ron was able to get a tail, and he had changing the color of his skin to match his surroundings down pretty well. 
Immediately after the lesson, Ron and Harry ran to the Quidditch field to squeeze in their practice. Since they were in first place, and their next game wasnt until before summer vacation, their practices werent as important as they used to be. After throwing a few Quaffles around, and catching some Snitches, the team called it a night, and Harry headed to the Great Hall for his meeting with Cho. 
For the most part of their meeting, it was Cho who was teaching Harry. She showed him hexes and spells hed never heard of. She showed him the Maherius Hex that made the victim feel as though he was being stabbed in the location the spell hit; she showed him the Kano Micro curse that shrunk someone to the size of a mouse, and a really neat spell, the Apendo Keros spell; it allowed the user to control the temperature of an area. The only spell that Harry taught Cho was the Disarming Spell, and he was surprised she hadnt known about it.
I thought it was a basic spell, said Harry after Cho told him she didnt know it. Wouldnt you have learned it in Defense Against the Dark Arts?
Did you learn it in that class? she asked.
Well, no.
So then how would I know it?
I dont know. I guess I just assumed that whatever I know, others do.
Cho just smiled at this answer, and Harry continued teaching her the spell. It was around ten when they both said goodbye, and went back to their rooms. Harry went to bed, relieved to not find any note on it, and fell asleep, thinking about how tomorrow would be almost exactly like today. 
After what seemed like forever, the week was over, and it was time for the first meeting of the Dueling Club. All the tables in the Great Hall were pushed aside to make room for the sixteen members to have room to duel. Since there was no captain, Professor Flitwick would be controlling the first meeting. He put a charm on himself so that he hovered above everyones heads.
Good afternoon everyone, squeaked Professor Flitwick, flying about the room with a large wizards hat in his hand. I thank you all for coming here, and hope you are all ready for some good dueling fun! I have already put all of your names into this hat, and I will draw them out two at a time, and the two will duel with each other. The winner will keep his name in the hat, and the losers name will stay out. Whoevers name is in the hat at the end wins.
The winner of each match will be determined easily. Whoever loses their wand first loses. Either by disarming, grabbing it out, or even dropping it, it doesnt matter. Also, there will be absolutely no toleration of illegal spells, and if any are used, I will personally see to it that you are put away for life. Professor Flitwicks normally kind demeanor seemed to have gone away during that last sentence. His face twisted into an expression of meanness that everyone seemed to notice. But, it immediately transformed back into the kind expression that everyone knew and loved. Professor Flitwick did a little spin in the air, and put his hand inside the hat. He took out two pieces of paper:
The first match is
The entire crowd was silent as he peered over the sheets of parchment. All eyes were fixed upon him, wondering if they would be first.
Mr. Aylar Dumbledore against Mr. Fred Weasley!
Harry gave a sigh of relief, and he heard others do the same. Then, as if by instinct, the entire club made a circle. Aylar and Fred stepped out of the circle, and into the center.
Now, bow to each other, said Professor Flitwick. Aylar bent all the way down, and Fred went down a little. It didnt appear as though he were used to being formal.
On my mark one two go!
Expelliarmus! yelled Fred.
Bovini Magus! yelled Aylar. The two spells met in midair, and it was clear whose spell was stronger. Aylars spell flowed into Freds beam, and it hit him. He started shaking, and turned a bright yellow. Then, something very odd happened. Fred grew tiny horns out of the top of his head, and his hands and feet started turning into hooves. His skin turned white, and his face became elongated. After a few shrieks of surprise, and giggle of laughter, it was evident what Aylar had done: he turned Fred into a cow.
Moo! said Fred when he was finally totally cow. Aylar walked over to him, picked his wand up from off the floor, and held it high in the air, as if it were a trophy. There was a little applause, and then Aylar changed Fred back into a human. He waddled over to Aylar, and picked up his wand from his hand.
Thanks, said Fred annoyingly. 
The winner of this round is Aylar Dumbledore! said Professor Flitwick. He put Aylars name back into the hat, and threw Freds up into the air. It magically disappeared. Aylar and Fred returned to their spots in the circles, with Aylar looking extremely happy with himself.
Thats a transformation charm, whispered Hermione into Harrys ear. Its incredibly hard to pull off. Id bet hes the first first-year ever to do it.
Our next contestants are Mr. Neville Longbottom and Mr. Ronald Weasley! said Professor Flitwick. Harry gave Ron a pat on the back as he walked out into the middle of the circle. Ron and Neville bowed to each other.
Three two go!
Poli Omihi! yelled Ron.
Stupefy! yelled Neville. Nevilles beam shot right past Rons head, missing him, but Rons hit Neville right in the face. The light ray exploded into a million bubbles and tons of foam. Neville was blown backwards by it, and he fell over on his back, drowning in the suds. Everyone in the circle was laughing. Ron walked over to Neville and helped him up.
Neville spat out some foam that was in his mouth, and gave his wand to Ron as a sign that he had obviously won. Neville walked back to his spot in the circle, trying to clean himself off.
The winner is Ronald Weasley! said Professor Flitwick as he threw Rons name back in the bag, and Nevilles into the air. Ron threw Nevilles wand back at him. Neville barely caught it.
These rounds are going by fairly quick! said Professor Flitwick. This meeting may not take as long as I had thought. Anyway, the next match is Mr. George Weasley against Miss. Hermione Granger!
Hermione put her head up high, and marched into the center. George walked into the center, not looking nearly as confident. They bowed to each other.
Three two one go!
Bona Nox! yelled Hermione.
Stupefy! yelled George. Hermiones black beam was much faster than Georges, and it hit him right in the stomach. For a second, it appeared as though the spell had done nothing.
Help! yelled George. I cant see!
Engorgio! yelled Hermione, pointing her wand at herself. She immediately grew four times her size.
Expelliarmus! she yelled, much louder and deeper than her normal voice. Georges wand shot out of his hand, and right into Hermiones massive fist. George, however, didnt seem to notice. He was running around, unable to see.
Im blind! he yelled after nearly smashing into Ron.
Bona Lumos! yelled Hermione. A yellow beam hit George, and he stopped running around. She tapped herself with her own wand, and shrunk back to her normal size. Hermione threw Freds wand back at him.
Hermione Granger is the winner! said Professor Flitwick. Hermione walked back to the circle.
Why didnt you just use the Expelliarmus spell first? asked Harry.
Because you should always disable your opponents first, then increase your power, and then attack them, said Hermione. I read it in Dueling Dos and Donts.
Wow, what a surprise, you read it in a book, said Ron, rolling his eyes, Hermione jabbed him in the side with her elbow.
The next match is Mr. Seamus Finnigan versus Miss. Ginny Weasley!
Ginny and Seamus walked into the center and bowed to each other.
One two three go!
Expelliarmus! yelled Ginny.
Wingardium Leviosa! yelled Seamus, surprisingly pointing the wand at himself. The Expelliarmus spell missed him as he flew into the air, going higher and higher. 
Ha ha! Cant catch me! he yelled from the ceiling. Seamus was up higher than Professor Flitwick now. 
Stupefy! Stupefy! Stupefy! yelled Ginny, each time missing Seamus as he flew around. Ginny kept shooting more stupefy spells at him, but they were all missing, and doing no good. Then, she suddenly stopped. 
Petrificus Totalus! she yelled, quickly spinning her wand in a circular motion. The beam, instead of staying a straight line, sprayed all over, so much that even Seamus couldnt avoid it all; one of them hit him. Seamus went all rigid, and then fell to the floor with a loud bang, still frozen. Ginny walked up to him, and took his wand out of his petrified hand.
Ginny Weasley is the winner! said Professor Flitwick, flying about.
Ginny tapped Seamus with her wand, and he woke up from his frozen state. She gave him her hand, and picked him up, giving him back his wand. They both returned to the circle, with Seamus looking somewhat disgruntled.
Wow, Ron, said Harry, Ginnys really good!
Well, she is top of the class so far for the fourth years, so I guess he has to be good. This remark took Harry by surprise. He knew Ginny was good, but he didnt know she was top of her class.
The next match is Mr. Vincent Crabbe and Miss. Cho Chang!
Harry mouthed Good luck to Cho as stepped into the middle of the circle, not that she needed it. She was an outstanding student, and Crabbe was not. Cho bowed to Crabbe, but he barely moved his head, either out of wanting to be disrespectful, or because he was absorbed in Chos beauty. 
Five six seven go! yelled Professor Flitwick, too excited to notice he said the wrong numbers.
Eks-pehl-ee-arhm-uss, mumbled Crabbe, sounding out the spell as he went. Nothing came out of his wand.
Maherius! yelled Cho, much more confidently and quickly than Crabbe. The red beam hit Crabbe right in the shoulder. He immediately gripped it and let out a scream, dropping his wand in the process.
Accio wand! yelled Cho. Crabbes wand flew right from the floor to her hand. Crabbe was now on the floor, gripping his shoulder for dear life. 
Miss Chang is the winner! said Professor Flitwick, throwing Crabbes name high into the air. Cho walked over to Crabbe, and dropped his wand on his stomach before she walked back to the circle. Malfoy and Goyle had to drag Crabbe back. It took him several minutes to calm down from the spell. 
Cho smiled at Harry. As she did, a new feeling came over Harry. What would he do if he had to fight Cho? Would he lose on purpose and lose her respect? Or would he win and lose her love? Or would he try his best and have her still win, making him feel embarrassed?
Before Harry could think about it for too long, Professor Flitwick took the names for the next match out of the hat.
The next competitors are
Not Cho, not Cho thought Harry.
Mr. Harry Potter!
Oh no, even worse thought Harry.
Against
Not Cho, not Cho hoped Harry again.
Mr. Gregory Goyle!
Harry breathed a huge sigh of relief. Ron patted him on the back, and Cho gave him an encouraging smile as he walked towards the center. Malfoy pushed Goyle into the center, whispering something in his ear and laughing.
Harrys immediate thought was that being in the center of circle, and viewing it from a first-person perspective, was a lot different than being on the outside and seeing it from a third-person perspective. He could see Goyle, right in front of him, with Malfoy directly behind him, a sinister smile on his face. Harry could see everyone around him and what they were doing: some were chewing gum, some were practicing spells, some had their hands in their pockets, rocking back and forth, and some were glaring right at them. It was very nerve wrecking. Professor Flitwick shot over between them.
Ready set go! he yelled.
Slugus Arostos! yelled Goyle, sounding better than Crabbe, perhaps because he wasnt fighting a girl.
Kano Micro! yelled Harry in reply. Just as Goyles spell was about to hit him, he dropped on the ground, and did a forward roll, avoiding it perfectly. When he stood back up, there was no sign of Goyle anywhere.
Where are you? asked Harry, looking around.
Hes right there! said Ron, pointing to the ground, causing everyone, including Harry, to start laughing. Where Goyle used to be, there was now a small bug with a wand next to it. Harry bent down to get the wand, and saw that the bug was a very small Goyle, jumping up and down, waving his arms, squeaking out incoherent words. 
Engorgio! said Harry, trying to keep from laughing too hard. Goyle returned to his normal, but quite large, size. Harry gave him back his wand.
Harry Potter is the winner! said Professor Flitwick, spinning around, and tossing Goyles name into the air. Harry walked back to his spot in the circle, getting some congratulations from Ron, Hermione, Ginny, and Cho.
Our next match is Mr. Justin Finch-Fletchley against Mr. Sy- Syin Tci!
Tci walked into the center of the circle, looking extremely confident. He took his jacket off, and to everyones surprise, and the girls delight, he had no shirt on under it. Harry noticed he was extremely muscular, and he had several scars all over. What was the deal with him? Tci reached into the sheath on his back with his gloved hands, and took out his Swand. 
The Swand was extremely beautiful. It had a golden handle with small rubies encrusted into it. The blade was quite long, and extremely shiny, with a small picture of a wand painted on it. The blade reflected the light coming in through the windows all over the room. Tci held it with both hands in front of him, down to his legs.
Justin walked into the ring, looking extremely nervous. He took out his wand, and held it in front of him, trying to look impressive too, but failing miserably.
On your mark get set go!
Expelli- started Justin, before Tci took over.
Karthiaki Prosvolus! he yelled so loudly that the room felt like it was shaking. He pointed his Swand right at Justins chest. No beam shot out of the Swand, but a spell seemed to have taken effect. Justin dropped his wand, and clutched his heart. His eyes were bulging out of his sockets, and the veins were growing all over his face. Sweat was pouring down his hair all over. He fell to his knees, still clutching his heart, as though it were going to explode. 
Tci coolly walked over to Justins wand, and put his Swand up to it. He flicked his Swand, causing the wand to fly high in the air. Everyone, except Justin, watched it fly high in the air, until it started coming down. Faster and faster it fell until Tci caught it in his hand.
Tci is the winner, said Professor Flitwick, but not as excitedly as he usually did. Professor Flitwick pointed his wand at Justin, and said something. Justin stood up, sweat still all over his face. While that was an expertly use of the Karthiaki Curse, Tci, I would advise you not to use it again, it is far too dangerous.
Of course professor, said Tci as he put his Swand back into the sheath, and put his jacket back on. 
Mr. Longbottom, will you please take Justin to Madam Pomfrey? asked Professor Flitwick.
Yes professor, said Neville, walking over to Justin, and propping him up on his shoulder, carrying him to the Hospital Wing. 
Hey Tci! said Harry.
Yes Harry? asked Tci, looking as though nothing in the world could have pleased him more than hearing Harry talk to him.
What did you do to Justin?
I used to Karthiaki Curse on him, he said. It made him feel as though he were having a heart attack.
Oh, thats good, said Harry. He now had to worry about facing Tci too. What other deadly curses did he know?
Will Mr. Draco Malfoy and Mr. Ernie Macmillan please enter the ring! giggled Professor Flitwick. Malfoy rolled his eyes as he strutted into the center of the circle. 
Ill show you how to do the Slug Curse properly, Goyle, said Malfoy as he and Ernie took out their wands. Malfoy looked at Ron. Ive done it on Weasley before.
I hope I get to fight him fumed Ron.
One two three go!
Slugus Arostos! yelled Malfoy before Ernie could even say a word. Malfoys green beam hit him like a truck. Ernie fell over backwards, and looked as though he was foaming at the mouth. After a few seconds though, Harry realized that foam wasnt coming out of his mouth: it was slugs. Ernie stood up, but just as he did, a hundred slugs flew out of his mouth with a loud nauseating burp. They spilled all over the floor, creating a giant mess.
Accio wand! yelled Malfoy. The wand came out of the sluggish goo, and into his hand. He spun it around a few times, like an outlaw would do to his gun after winning a showdown.
Draco Malfoy is the winner, said Professor Flitwick. Mr. Macmillan, please go to Madam Pomfrey. Shes going to be busy tonight!
Ernie nodded, and covered his mouth as another sickening gurgling noise erupted in his stomach. He ran out of the Great Hall, and another hundred slugs were heard splattering to the floor when the doors closed.
Professor Flitwick cleaned up the mess on the floor by just waving his wand. He put Malfoys name back in the hat, and threw Ernies into the air.
The first eight battles are done, said Professor Flitwick. The next battles will be the winners of the previous rounds. Good luck to you all! Our first match up is Miss. Ginny Weasley against Miss. Cho Chang!
Harry, once again, wished Cho luck as she stepped into the circle. Maybe he imagined it, but Ginny looked hurt that Harry hadnt wished him luck. They bowed at each other, and Professor Flitwick started his countdown. 
Three two one go!
Expelliarmus! yelled Ginny.
Locomotor Mortis! yelled Cho. The two spells met in midair, each trying to force itself into the other. Ginny and Cho looked as though they were concentrating very hard, eachs eyes were fixated on the link of the spells. 
Suddenly, something unexpected happened. At the point where the two wands spells were connected, there was a massive explosion. Colored lights and beams shot everywhere. Harry, and most of the other people in the circle, ducked for cover. Those who didnt were blown over, causing a massive and chaotic mess. Then, after a few seconds, the and explosions stopped.
You can get up now! said Professor Flitwick. The spells have reversed their targets! Miss Changs legs are frozen, but she has Ginnys wand, so she is the winner!
Harry stood up, and clapped a little as everyone else was recovering from the blast. Professor Flitwick threw Ginnys name into the air, and put Chos back in, getting ready to start the next round. He shot something at Chos legs, and she could move again. Cho gave Ginny back her wand. 
Everyone, everyone! Calm down, the next round is about to begin! He reached into the hat that had considerably fewer names than the amount it started with. The next match is Mr. Ronald Weasley against
I hope its you, Malfoy, whispered Ron, louder than he shouldve.
Mr. Draco Malfoy! 
Ron, who was looking happy before Malfoys name had been called, now looked almost sick as he walked to the middle of he circle.
Be careful what you wish for Weasley, snickered Malfoy. It might just come true! Ha ha!
Im gonna get you Malfoy, you just wait Ron barely lowered his head to bow, and Malfoy didnt bow at all.
Cats hats bats go! squeaked Professor Flitwick.
Arachni Sorta! yelled Malfoy.
Megola Thagono! yelled Ron. Millions of spiders shot out of Malfoys wand, like a machine gun, only hundreds at a time. They were all locked onto Ron. But, a massive mouth came out of Rons wand. It was like a human mouth, without any face around it, and it was at least fifty times the size. It started eating some of the spiders. Ron just blasted the few spiders that got through the mouth. He was faring better than Harry would have thought.
Oplo! yelled Ron. A small yellow sphere shot out of his wand, and it hit Malfoy, causing him to fall back. 
Tri Oplo! shouted Malfoy. Three yellow orbs shot out of his wand, and hit Ron. He fell over on his back, clutching the spots where the orbs had hit him. Malfoy jumped to his feet, and pointed his wand at Ron.
Asphyxiatus!
Harry had never heard of this spell before, and was eager to see what it did. A small clear cube popped out of Malfoys wand, and landed on Rons stomach. It immediately expanded so that it was at least three times Rons size, and he was inside it. The box was also slowly but surely filling with a sand-like substance. Ron got up, just in time to notice what was happening: the box was filling up with sand, and he was going to suffocate. When it was up to his knees, he started banging on the sides of the box, but it made no sound. The box was filling much more quickly now, the sand was up past his navel now. 
Do you give up? asked Malfoy, when the sand was up to Malfoys chest. Ron looked away from him, and started shooting sparks all over the sides of the box but they did nothing. The sand was up to his neck when he finally yelled as loud as he could, even though it was barely hearable through the box, I give up!
Malfoy tapped the box with his wand, and it immediately disappeared, sand and all. Ron collapsed to the ground, gasping for breath.
Draco Malfoy is the winner! said Professor Flitwick, throwing Rons name into the air. Ron waddled back to his spot in the circle next to Harry. 
I cant believe I lost to him, grumbled Malfoy. Harry didnt say anything.
Our next competition will be Mr. Harry Potter!
Not Cho thought Harry again.
Against Miss. Hermione Granger!
Oh no, thought Harry, that match up wasnt much better. How was he going to fight one of his best friends? He and Hermione looked at each other, and walked into the middle of the circle. They walked to opposite ends, and bowed.
Red light yellow light green light go! squeaked Professor Flitwick.
Kano Micro! yelled Hermione.
Kooverta Maximus! yelled Harry. A large and clear shield popped up in front of him, and it absorbed the curse. Harry had expected she would try and use a spell to disable him, so he was ready for it. 
Expelliarmus! yelled Harry.
Engorgio! yelled Hermione, pointing her wand at herself. 
Hermione did a quick little trick to avoid the Expelliarmus spell: as soon as the spell hit her, she threw her wand up in the air. Since she wasnt holding a wand, the spell didnt affect her. When she caught the wand again, she was five times her original size: a Hermione version of Hagrid. 
Ballano! boomed Hermione. A massive, gray ball sprouted out of her wand, and started rolling towards Harry. If he didnt move quickly, it was going to crush him. Harry quickly jumped out of the balls path, but the ball didnt give up that easily, it started following him.
Oplo! yelled Harry, aiming at the ball. But when the yellow sphere hit the ball, it just bounced right off. Harry had to get rid of the ball before he could worry about Hermione but then he got an idea. What if he got rid of them both at the same time. Harry stopped running, and turned to the ball.
Wingardium Leviosa! he yelled. The spell hit the ball, and he directed it right into Hermione. The ball hit her in the face, and knocked her out before she had a chance to react. Harry ran up to her, and plucked her wand out of her massive hand. When he did, she turned back to her normal size. 
Harry Potter wins! said Professor Flitwick, still flying around the room. 
Ennervate, said Harry, pointing his wand at Hermione. She opened her eyes, and shook herself. Harry helped her up, and gave her back her wand. 
Good game, she said, trying not to sound too disappointed. Harry smiled, and walked back to the perimeter of the circle with her.
Will Mr. Tci and Mr. Aylar Dumbledore please report to the center of the circle please? piped Professor Flitwick. 
Oh, this should be a good match! said Ron. The greatest first year ever against the awesome exchange student!
The rest of the group must have been thinking the same thing as Ron, because they all started talking excitedly. Tci and Aylar, however, didnt look happy at all about this match up. They both looked worried and scared.
Tci did his same entrance as before, and stood in position with his Swand. Aylar just kept his wand held up high. Then, Harry mightve imagined it, but Tci winked at Aylar. It looked very out of place, for a serious dueler to wink at his opponent, but then Aylar nodded.
Before Harry had much time to think about this, Professor Flitwick started the countdown for the match.
One fish two fish red fish blue fish!
Expelliarmus! both Aylar and Tci yelled at the same time, their spells meeting in midair. But, to Harrys and everyone elses surprise, one spell did not overpower the other. In fact, the beam of light connecting the two wands started to turn a deep gold. Aylar and Tci did not seem to care about this, thought. They were both still staring at each other, as if waiting for something.
Just then, something even more unexpected happened: Aylar and Tci started to float off the ground. Higher and higher the hovered, until they were above everyones heads. Then, at that moment, Harry thought he saw Aylar nod to Tci, and Tci nodding back. Tci said something, and the beam of light then turned a violent red, and there was another huge explosion. Red light was everywhere, flooding the room. Everyone collapsed to the ground again, to be safe, and no one got up until Professor Flitwick made an announcement.
I dont believe it! he said, sounding as if he didnt. Its a tie!
Everyone got up, mumbling, and trying to disprove Professor Flitwick, but it was true: both wands lay on the floor, away from their owners. Both Tci and Aylar appeared to be unconscious, and it wasnt until Professor Flitwick ennervated them both that they awoke. 
Well boys, said Professor Flitwick, Im sorry, but its a tie. Both of your names will be thrown out.
Tci and Aylar looked surprised and angered at this news, but it didnt look like genuine emotion, it looked like they were faking it. But, they both walked back to their spots in the circle.
Tci! yelled Harry. What happened? he looked over at Harry and shrugged.
I dont know, he said. I guess our spells just negated each others with some sort of horrible explosion.
Harry nodded, but still wasnt sure if that was the truth. But, the promise of another match made him forget all about the last one.
I am pleased to say that there are only three more names in this hat! Mr. Potter, Mr. Malfoy, and Miss. Chang! Congratulations to you all! But, our next match is Miss Chang against
Not me, not me hoped Harry, it was either him or Malfoy.
Mr. Malfoy!
Harry breathed a huge sigh of relief, but, then he thought, if Cho won, he would have to face her anyway in the next round. Harry didnt know who to cheer for: Malfoy or Cho.
They both walked to the center of the circle, and bowed. Malfoy looked much more confident battling Cho than Crabbe did. 
Eerht owt eno go!
Gluteus Maximus! yelled Malfoy. 
Maherius! yelled Cho.
The two spells barely missed each other in midair, and Chos spell hit Malfoy first, right in the chest but Malfoy looked unaffected. Malfoys spell hit Cho, and it looked as though nothing had happened, so Cho shot another Maherius at Malfoy, but he avoided that one, and when he did, he started laughing.
Whats so funny? asked Cho.
Your rear! yelled Malfoy, almost falling over in laughter. Cho looked behind her, and screamed. Her behind had grown twice its normal size in seconds, and did not show any size of slowing. She dropped her wand, and tried pushing it back in, but it was not working. Her butt was growing exponentially, it was now the size of a beach ball, and Malfoy seemed to be enjoying it as he was rolling on the floor in laughter, but not laughing so much that he couldnt pick up her wand.
Mr. Malfoy is the winner, announced Professor Flitwick, running over to try and help Cho, who was in tears, and whose behind was now the size of a car. He put some charm on it, and it started shrinking back to its normal size. She calmed down, and, with red eyes, walked back to her spot in the circle
Since there are only two names left in the hat, there is no need to draw them. The next, and final, match is between Mr. Malfoy and Mr. Potter, for title of Captain of the Dueling Club.
Harry walked to the center, fuming with anger. Malfoy had embarrassed Cho, and he was going to get revenge. He could feel the sweat oozing on his hand as he gripped his wand tighter and tighter. 
Are you sure you dont want to just give up now? asked Malfoy, mockingly. Now lets see, what part of your body should I enlarge to embarrass you? How about that giant scar? He laughed, and Harry could feel his blood boiling.
Un deux trois roulez! yelled Professor Flitwick, excited beyond belief over the last match, and from the one coming up.
Reversio! yelled Malfoy.
Inversio! yelled Harry. The two spells hit their targets, and both Harry and Malfoy were affected. Malfoys Reversio spell made Harry see right as left, and left as right, and his Inversio spell made Malfoy see up as down, and down as up.
Youll pay for that Potter! spat Malfoy, trying to align himself, and not looked scared that he might fall to the ceiling at any second. Corpsi!
A giant cadaver shot out of Malfoys wand, and clung itself to Harry. He tried to resist all urges to scream as the stench of its rotting organs met his nostrils. Harry tried to take it off, but the harder he tugged at it, the more secure it seemed to stay on. 
Aqua Nero! yelled Harry, looking through the rib cage of the skeleton, and aiming at Malfoy. A cloud appeared above Malfoys head, and rain started pouring all over him. Within half a second, he was fully drenched. 
Fteros! yelled Malfoy, pointing his wand at himself. Wings sprouted from his back, and he shot into the air, flying unsteadily since he still saw the ground as the ceiling, and the ceiling as the ground. If Harry was going to beat Malfoy, he had to fly too.
Pretending to tap his back with his wand, Harry transformed his back into wings, and shot up right in front of Malfoy. When he was in the air, the skeleton fell of him, and collapsed into a pile of powder on the floor. Harry was pleased, however, to see that his cloud was still hovering above Malfoy, and he was soaked beyond belief. Just then, Harry looked down to see that more students had entered the Great Hall to watch the final duel, and they were all standing well out of the way of Malfoy and Ron.
Not bad Potter, not bad! You shouldve joined me when you had the chance, youve got talent!
No, Malfoy, you should have joined me! yelled Harry, swooping down, and behind Malfoy. Tri Oplo! The three orbs shot out of Harrys wand, and hit Malfoy in the back, almost knocking him to the ground. 
Quadheri Excallibus! yelled Malfoy, turning around to see Harry. Two arms exploded out of Malfoys right side, and two more arms shot out of his left side. The arms, however, did not look human, they were like five-fingered scythes. Malfoy gave a yell, and flew towards Harry, brandishing his arms. Harry soared out of the way just in time.
Youre taking this Dueling Club thing a bit far, Malfoy! yelled Harry. You couldve killed me!
Dont you see? asked Malfoy coolly. This goes beyond the Hogwarts Dueling Club, this is about me, and all that I stand for!
What!? asked Harry, backing away.
Fotia Poli! yelled Malfoy. A beam of flames shot out of his wand, and seared Harrys leg.
Arg! yelled Harry, clutching his leg. There was a small hole where the spell had hit him, and blood was slowly dripping out and onto the floor. When Harry looked down to see where his blood was falling, he noticed that the Great Hall was almost entirely filled with students now, and even a few teachers. Everyone must have wanted to know how this match was going to end by seeing it in person.
Harry looked up, and flew out of the way as Malfoy charged at him again with his knife-hands out front. 
Maherius! Maherius! Maherius! yelled Harry. Each of the three spells hit Malfoy, but they did not affect him. Malfoy laughed.
Thats just imaginary pain, Potter! I am in total control of my mind, only real pain can hurt me!
Harry had to think of some other way to beat Malfoy other than just shooting random spells at him, Malfoy was better than he had anticipated, far better. Harry looked down, and saw some students brandishing the Slytherin banner, cheering for Malfoy. The banner gave Harry and idea.
He flew to the ground, in a clearing of students, and Malfoy followed him down.
Serpensorta! Serpensorta! Serpensorta! Serpensorta! yelled Harry, screaming the spell each time. Four snakes stood before him.
Get him! hissed Harry, pointing at Malfoy. The snakes nodded, and shot towards Malfoy. He tried to fly away quickly, but one of the snakes jumped up and bit him, dragging him down to the ground. All four of the snakes were now biting Malfoy all over.
Give up Malfoy! yelled Harry, feeling very proud of himself.
NEVER! screamed Malfoy. He stood up, and burst into flames. The snakes that were on him exploded into four small piles of ash, and the flame surrounding Malfoy got bigger. I didnt think it would come to this Potter, but TORA DEMENTORA!
A large black orb shot out of Malfoys wand, and hit Harry. The entire world around Harry melted away into a massive and dark void. 
Where are you Malfoy?! yelled Harry. Come out! Harry turned around, and was surprised to see that there was someone behind him. He looked up, and saw that it wasnt Malfoy but it was his parents. 
They were right there, in front of them, smiling down at him, as if they had never been gone.
Wha- whats going on? asked Harry.
We love you, Harry, said his mom. Harrys eyes suddenly filled with tears, he ran up to them an gave them a hug, crying more into them. This wasnt a trick this wasnt a spell he was with his parents now.
Just then, Harry felt something fall onto his head, like a raindrop. He looked up, and saw what it was: blood. His mom was bleeding from the mouth. Harry backed away, and his mom collapsed to the floor. Harry saw, behind her, a figure that he remembered: Voldemort as a teenager, Tom Riddle.
He was holding a knife in his hand that was dripping with blood, and he was laughing, flinging the blood from the knife everywhere as he laughed. Harrys dad spoke,
Why Harry? Why did you kill her?
What do you mean, I didnt kill-
Its all you fault shes dead! I wish you were never born! yelled his father. Go away! GO AWAY! Harry backed away slowly, not believing what he was seeing. Harrys dad bent down over his wife, and when he did, Tom Riddle plunged the knife into his head, right through the top. He screamed so loud, Harry thought his ears were going to explode. Blood poured out of his dads mouth, ears, eyes, and nose before he collapsed and died. Tom Riddle was now laughing harder than ever. 
No whispered Harry. Tom stopped laughing.
Its you fault, he said very monotone, staring right at Harry. I wouldnt have had to attack them if you hadnt been born.
No no its not! yelled Harry, turning around. When he turned around though, he was facing an even more horrible sight. There were hundreds of Tom Riddles, all pointing at him, and chanting,
Its all your fault. Its all your fault. 
No its not, said Harry, turning around, and finding himself facing a hundred more Tom Riddles. He was surrounded by an infinite number of them. 
Its all your fault. Its all your fault, they chanted in unison.
No said Harry, feeling as though he may collapse. The Tom Riddles were now closing in on him.
Its all your fault. Its all your fault.
No its not! yelled Harry, feeling stronger. He had to remind himself, this wasnt real. This is just a spell. He thought it was real before, but now he knew the truth! The duel! Malfoy! This was just one of his spells!
Its all your fault. Its all your fault.
This is just a spell
Its all your fault. Its all your fault.
This is just a spell.
Its all your fault. Its all your fault.
This is just a spell!
Its all your fault. Its all your fault.
THIS IS JUST A SPELL! ITS NOT REAL! screamed Harry. He suddenly found himself back where he was, fighting Malfoy. He looked terrified, seeing that Harry had somehow gotten out of his spell. People were surrounding them, waiting to see what was going to happen next. Harry jumped to his feet, and brandished his wand.
ITS NOT REAL! he yelled as loud as he could. A giant gold and red beam shot out of Harrys wand, and hit Malfoy in the forehead. He fell to the ground, unconscious.
All eyes were on Harry, who was breathing fast. The Great Hall was completely silent. Harry walked over to Malfoy, hearing each step echo through the hall. When he arrived at Malfoy, he bent over, picked up his wand, and held it in the air.
The Great Hall burst into applause. Ron and Hermione came running up to him, and carried him back to where the rest of the club was, with cheers coming from the audience the entire time. 
Congratulations Mr. Potter, said Professor Flitwick. You are the Dueling Club captain and champion.
The audience exploded into applause again, and Harry could see some Slytherins dragging Malfoy out of the Great Hall and to the Hospital Wing. Harry felt a hand on his shoulder. He looked behind him, and saw Mrs. Figg.
Congratulations Harry, she said, though she was looking grim.
Thanks professor, said Harry.
Harry, I have some good news and some bad news.
What is it? asked Harry.
Well, the good news is that Lupin and Sirius have found the last phoenix we need to bring your mom back.
And whats the bad news?
The bad news ah, yes the bad news well, Harry, Im afraid your moms body has been stolen.


Chapter 20- The Trap
Harry waited until everyone in the Great Hall had left except for himself, Ron, Hermione, and Mrs. Figg until he said anything.
What?! How could it be stolen? 
It has just been reported missing, said Mrs. Figg. Me, Sirius, and Remus decided the safest place to keep it was in the Forbidden Forest, with the giants.
Why didnt you just keep it in your office? asked Ron.
There are random checks in offices, Weasley, said Mrs. Figg. Ever since lest year, with Barty Crouch hiding Alastor Moody in his office, security has been tighter. Every drawer, every inch is checked. If I kept her in the office, she would have been discovered and confiscated.
So what are we going to do? asked Harry. We have to get it back. Mrs. Figg was looking quite uncomfortable now.
Well, thats the problem. You see, under normal circumstances, I would have just gone and looked for it, but I cant.
Why not?
Because I have to be at the Ministry of Magic in just a few hours. At this remark, Harry, Ron, and Hermione gave a grunt.
What? There has to be some way around that, said Harry, folding his arms.
Im afraid not. Since I am a ranking wizard, that is, a wizard over the age of forty, I am required to attend. If I dont go, I could be sent to Azka- well, whatever prison they have set up now.
Cant you just clone yourself? asked Ron.
No, Im afraid thats not an option, said Mrs. Figg.
Why not?
Security will be tight at the election. If I send a clone, they will find out. They have ways of telling if youre a clone or not, and they dont want people sending clones to elections, they dont want people to take democracy for granted.
Also, cloning humans is messy business. Since theres no clean way to get rid of a clone, besides killing it, Id have to send it to the Ministry of Cloning, and Id have to tell them why I had made a clone of myself.
Hermione nudged Harry in the side.
I wish someone had told us that before we cloned ourselves, she whispered. 
I wouldnt be asking you to do this if I wasnt completely confident youd be able to accomplish it, said Mrs. Figg. Anyway, its probably just some elves or centaurs that took the body anyway. You can just ask for it back and theyll give it to you.
Alright, said Harry. Well do it.
Great, said Mrs. Figg. Now, Ive been told by Hagrid that you know where the giants are, so just go to them. Ask them where they last saw the body, and you can just follow the tracks in the ground that the body made when they took it away.
What does the body look like? asked Ron. How will we identify it?
The body is incased in a light-blue, transparent box. You should be able to see the skeleton inside it.
Harry shuddered at this last comment. Hed see the skeleton of his mother.
Its almost time for bed, said Mrs. Figg. Everyone should be in their dormitories now, so its the perfect time to set out. Good luck!
Harry, Ron, and Hermione walked away from her, and out of the Great Hall. When they exited, the candles that were alight inside snuffed out, and they were left in complete darkness.
Geez, said Harry. We might not even need the invisibility cloak its so dark.
We should bring it, just in case, said Ron as they got to the portrait of the Fat Lady. She yawned as they arrived at her.
Ah, I heard about your match today Harry, dear. Congratulations, she yawned.
Thanks, said Harry. Mungadae. The portrait swung open to reveal an empty common room.
You stay here, said Harry to Ron and Hermione. Ill run up and get the cloak.
Harry dashed up the stairs, careful not to make a sound. He carefully opened the door to his room, tip-toed over to his drawer, and took out his invisibility cloak. 
He put the liquid-like cloak on, and he slipped away from the visible realm. Harry ran back downstairs to the opened portrait, and climbed out.
All set, he whispered, causing Ron and Hermione to jump.
We didnt see you there, said Hermione, not looking at Harry.
Im right here, said Harry. They both turned to him. Get under!
All three of them had used the invisibility cloak at the same time before, but that was when they were younger. Now they were older, and bigger. It took a while for the three of them to organize themselves so that they all fit under it. As they were walking, it was extremely quiet, and dark. Harry felt he should say something.
Hey, have you guys heard anything about a dance? he asked. Ron and Hermione stared at him.
Besides the one we used in our alibi, no, said Ron. Why?
Because Cho just asked me out to a dance, and we dont know if its real or not yet, said Harry. I thinks he just overheard professor McGonagall talking about our alibi to Professor Dumbledore. 
Thats probably it, said Hermione. But, if there is one, at least you have a date.
Hey Hermione, said Ron, sounding a little timid. About being safe, you know how you told me last year, when I asked you out to the dance not to wait, and use you as a last resort?
Yes, said Hermione quickly.
Well if there is a dance would you just as a friend that is! Would you like to well um
Go to the dance with you?
Yes, said Ron, sounding relieved.
Of course I would, giggled Hermione. Maybe it was the fact that Rons elbow was in her ear, or that Harrys knee was right in her face, but Harry saw Hermione blush. Harry also saw Ron give a small smile, and an expression that Harry read as, Yes!
Were there, said Harry. They had reached the entrance of the school. Harry took the cloak off of them, and they all gave a huge sigh of relief as they stretched.
Lets open this thing, said Harry, pulling the door. It was much heavier than he expected it to be. Ron, help me!
Ron walked over, and started pulling on the same handle as Harry. They both pulled as hard as they could, but the door didnt budge.
How strong do you have to be to open this thing? asked Harry. Hermione, why dont you come and help us. Harry looked over, and saw that Hermione was laughing into her hands.
Whats so funny? asked Ron, putting his hands to his side.
Do you think Hogwarts would be that easy to break into? Just open the door, and walk right in? No way!
Well then, how do you propose we get in? asked Ron.
Like this, said Hermione. She walked up to the door, and took out her wand.
Alohamora Anigora! she said, tapping the door. It slowly swung open.
How did you know that? asked Harry.
Its in the prefect guide book, Harry, said Hermione stiffly. You should know it, you are a prefect after all.
Harry gave Ron a sarcastic smile.
Oh yeah, the prefect guide book, I read it all the time. Hermione shook her head, and walked out the door. 
Are we going to do this, or what? asked Hermione.
Oh, yeah, said Ron and Harry, walking out the door. They ran as quickly and swiftly as they could across the grounds, all the way to Hagrids hut, which had no lights on, and no smoke coming out of the chimney. It didnt look its usual inviting self. From there, they stepped into the Forbidden Forest.
Geez, said Ron. For being a Forbidden Forest, we certainly go in there an awful lot!
Which way to the giants? whispered Hermione.
This way, pointed Harry, remembering the path the unicorn went that they followed. They entered the forest, and it was even darker than Harry remembered it. It felt as though the woods were watching them, and the silence was extremely eerie. There wasnt any sound being made except for the crunch of leaves under their feet.
After walking a bit, Harry saw a glow.
That must be the giants fire, he said. They walked towards it, feeling the warmth of the fire all over them, it was extremely cold outside after all. 
As they got closer to the fire, Harry saw the outline of several giants getting clearer. They were all sleeping around the fire, and their horrible breath was almost overwhelming. Harry pulled his cloak over his nose, and Ron and Hermione did the same. 
Wha are you doin ere! boomed a voice from behind Harry. He turned around, and saw a giant standing before them with a huge club in her arm. But, this giant had a familiar face. It was Fridwulfa.
Its me, err- us! stuttered Harry, still intimidated by the massive club. 
Upon realizing who she was talking to, Fridwulfa dropped her club to the ground with a massive boom, and smiled.
Its Arry Potta and is ickle friends! she belched. Wha brings you here this time o nigh?
Something was stolen, said Harry calmly. A blue box we need it back.
Oh yea, said Fridwulfa, stroking her chin. Some teach from th school came dow earlier this year an told us to keep n eye on it, an if anything happin t it, to come an tell er.
Yep, squeaked Ron. Thats it.
Well, earlier some guys come down an they took it away. I wasnt here at th time, so I couldn stop em, an you cant depend on them for anything. She nodded her head in the direction of the sleeping giants.
Do you have any idea where they went? asked Hermione.
Well, I saw some tracks in th dirt, the box mightve made em. Im too busy t follow em though. I hope th box wasnt too mportant.
Well, err- uh. stuttered Harry, should he tell her that his moms corpse was in the box? 
Not really, said Ron. Just a few things of sentimental value.
Well then, said Fridwulfa. You best be on yer way, I got t keep gardin our place here, or else th otha crittas of th fores will take it over.
Thanks for your help, said Harry as they walked away, toward the sleeping giants. They went around the massive beings, and Harry immediately saw the tracks in the ground of where the box was dragged. He pointed it out to Ron and Hermione, and they all started to follow the tracks in the ground.
Lumos, they all said at the same time. Three beams of light suddenly appeared on the ground, and they continued following the tracks. Every now and then, they would have to make a slight direction adjustment, the box looked as though it had been dragged by someone who was either insane, or didnt have control over the box.
Strange, said Harry. Theres no footprints anywhere.
Maybe they walked in front of it, suggested Ron. Then the boxs tracks wouldve covered them. 
I dont know, there still should be some sign of them, said Harry quietly. 
Harry! said Hermione excitedly. Look over there! She pointed her beam of light in front of the three of them, and Harry saw what she had seen, it was the blue box. It was glowing a little, giving off some heat, and they could see the glow shining through the trees.
Harry, Ron, and Hermione slowly crept towards the box. They walked in an awkward direction towards it, trying to avoid having an attention drawn to themselves. As they got closer, they saw that the box was in the middle of a small clearing in the forest, and Harrys fear of seeing what was inside the box increased. Just before they were about to enter the clearing, Harry stopped.
What is it Harry? asked Hermione.
I- I dont know if I can see whats inside that box, he said. I mean, Ive been to funerals before, and its hard enough to look at someone you loved, their body lying in a casket. I dont know if I can bear seeing her skeleton. Ron and Hermione looked at each other.
Well, Harry if you dont want to come in, well understand, said Ron in a very low and quiet voice. 
Yeah, you can stay here, well bring it back, said Hermione. 
Harry shook his head.
No, I have to do this, he reminded himself out loud. I can do this. Ron and Hermione smiled at him, and Hermione put her hand on his shoulder as they walked into the clearing.
Wow, said Hermione, shielding her eyes. That boxs glow is bright! 
And its hot too, said Ron, wiping his forehead.
Lets just get it over with, said Harry, touching the box, and trying to pick it up. It was extremely heavy. Ron and Hermione came over to help him. They all gripped the box, and heaved with all their might.
Oh man, said Ron, wiping more sweat from his head. This thing is much heavier than it looks. Whoever brought it here must have been strong! Harry smiled, and started lifting again, but then a thought came to his mind. If the box was so hot, why werent they getting burned when they touched it? The heat must be coming from somewhere else.
Ron! Hermione! We have to get out of here! yelled Harry. It must be trap!
Why?
The box being stolen, the fact that there were no tracks, the extreme heat, and the box being lifted even though it was so heavy. They all add up to one thing.
What? asked Hermione. Harry was about to answer her, when someone came down from the sky and flew right over their heads. The heat was almost unbearable. Whatever swooshed down made a loud squawking noise.
It was a black phoenix! yelled Harry, starting to run away. It must have carried the box here, thats why there were no tracks, it flew, and since phoenixes can carry large packages, the box must have been no problem for it to pick up. The heat wasnt coming from the box, it was coming from the bird, watching us waiting for the right time to attack.
Thats exactly right, came a squeaky voice. Harry looked up, and stopped dead in his tracks. Right before him was Peter Pettigrew, Wormtail. He stood before them with his arms crossed, the silver one on top. So we meet again. Youre much smarter than even I thought, Harry. No wonder the Dark Lord wants you so badly. 
Harry gritted his teeth, and ran. He didnt care how Wormtail got there, he just cared about getting away from him. He saw Hermione do the same where was Ron? Suddenly, Harry felt his body go stiff, his arms fell to his sides, and his legs felt as though they had been glued together. He felt himself being moved backwards, to the spot where he just was.
No, no, no, no, no, said Wormtail, with a twisted smile. Youre not getting away again! Im taking you directly to the Dark Lord this time, hell do what he wishes with you kill you or make you join him.
Ill never join him, said Harry, surprised he still had control over his mouth. Wormtail shook his head and laughed.
Harry, he said, you think being in league with Voldemort is such a bad thing its not really. Its just like any other job. You have a task to do, and you get rewarded for how well you do and there are always promotions available. Its a very respectable career when you think about.
A career of killing, and making profit over people suffering! spat Harry. What is there to be gained by doing that?
Harry, said Wormtail softly, what is there to be gained by trying to stop it? Voldemort will prevail, whether you want him to or not, whether it is the next day, or the next year. You might as well get on his good side before its too late.
Never said Harry softly, even though things were looking hopeless. Wormtail sighed.
Well dont you worry. Im only good with words, Voldemort has other ways of getting people to join him! He gave a short laugh. Now then werent there three of you?
Harry moved his eyes over to the side, and saw Hermione was petrified as well, next to him but Ron was nowhere in sight. Where was he?
Where is that Weasley friend of yours? asked Wormtail, shooting a beam of light out of his wand, and looking around. 
Im right here, came a tiny whisper from Harrys side. He looked over, but no one was there. Wormtail kept on looking, he hadnt heard it. 
Ron, whispered Harry. Where are you?
Im right next to you, came a voice from next to Harry, but no one was there.
Are you wearing my invisibility cloak?
No Im camouflaged. Harry gave a small smile. Ron had used his chameleons camouflage to hide from Wormtail. Harry was sure happy Ron had chosen a chameleon for his animal. 
Im going to perform the counter curse on you, whispered Ron. The second I do, both of us need to stun Wormtail.
Why both of us? asked Harry.
Harry, said Ron lazily, hes a full grown Animagus wizard hes extremely powerful. Just one of us doing the stunning spell probably wouldnt do much, we need twice the power for it to take full effect.
Alright, said Harry. He felt a wand tap him on the back, and Ron mutter something. Harry felt as though he were a snowman that was melting very quickly. The feeling in his body parts was returning, and the second he could feel his arms, he grabbed his wand from his pocket, and pointed it at Wormtail who was bent over, looking under a rock for Ron.
Stupefy! yelled Harry and Ron together. Two blue beams shot out of their wands, and into the dark night. They both hit Wormtail at the same time. He froze where he was, bent over, and then collapsed to the ground with a shocked expression on his face. 
Ron ran over to Hermione, and performed the counter curse on her. She spun round, and gave Ron a hug, then a kiss on the cheek. 
You saved us, Ron, she said, going slightly red.
Oh. said Ron, touching his cheek where Hermione had kissed him. No problem none at all.
Alright you lovebirds, said Harry, folding his arms, we still have to get this box back to the giants, and do something with him, Wormtail.
Well, even though hes gone, said Hermione, the box is still going to be heavy, theres no way were going to be able to carry it all the way back to the giants. 
Almost wish that black phoenix was here maybe we could enlist his help and get him to carry it back, said Ron.
What happened to the phoenix? wondered Harry.
It was probably assisting Wormtail with this assignment, said Ron. It probably flew away when it saw he got stunned.
But why wasnt it with him when he was trying to recruit me asked Harry. Ron and Hermione shrugged.
Come on, said Hermione. We have more pressing matters than that.
That box is too heavy for any person to carry, said Ron.
And it must have enchantments on it so that no one can use spells on it, said Hermione.
Too heavy for a person, eh? said Harry, stroking his chin. Well, I know one thing its not too heavy for!
A phoenix? suggested Ron.
Well- yes and okay I know TWO things its not too heavy for a phoenix and a gryffin! said Harry excitedly. Hermione and Rons eyes widened.
Of course said Hermione.
Harry smiled, and clenched his fists, and closed his eyes. Wings popped out of his back, and his arms transformed into gryffins paws. He soared over to the top of the box, and gripped the sides with his paws. He picked it up into the air, it felt extremely light.
You guys carry Wormtail, said Harry from above. Hermione and Ron walked over to Peter; Ron gripped his legs, and Hermione gripped his head. They dragged him across the forest, not taking much notice or care if he hit a stump or a bush. It wasnt too long before they reached the place where the giants live. When they arrived, Fridwulfa came running up to them.
Oh Arry! Fank goodness yer live! she grunted loudly. Th centaurs came on ovr afta youse left an they said a summat bout a phoenix comin ter get ya! I wuz bout to come over when you is here, an oh my goodness! Youse got wings!
Shh! said Harry, setting the box down. No one except for me, Ron, and Hermione is supposed to know that I can transform like that! Fridwulfa put her fingers up to her mouth, and imitated zipping her lips.
Don worry now Arry, I won tell a soul, she belched. 
Now we need to ask another favor of you, said Ron, throwing his side of Wormtail to the ground.
Wut is it? 
We need you to watch this blue box again, said Harry. Keep a very close eye on it Fridwulfa! It is something very important.
Wut is it? she asked again.
Its a its something that will defeat Voldemort, said Harry. Fridwulfa put her hands to her ears, and started stomping her feet. Each time one of he legs came crashing down, it was as if there was an explosion. The earth shook beneath that massive force.
Don say th name! she said. 
Alright, alright! yelled Ron and Hermione together. Just stop your stomping! Fridwulfa stopped banging around.
So will you guard it? asked Harry, transforming his back and arms back to their normal form. Fridwulfa nodded and put her hand to her forehead, like a salute.
I will do my best, she said.
No, Fridwulfa, said Harry. I need you to make sure no one takes it, not for you to do your best. Fridwulfa looked at Harry for a moment, and then spoke.
I will guard it, or I will die trying, she said. Harry shook his head again.
No, no, no, he said. I need you to guard it, not to die. Fridwulfa lowered her enormous brow, and glared at Harry, trying to comprehend him.
No one will get it, she said, sounding as though she were guessing.
Exactly, said Harry. Now say it loud and proud! This was a mistake, Fridwulfa took in a massive breath and screamed as loud as she could.
NO ONE WILL GET IT! 
Even covering his ears didnt help. Harry could hear her loud and clear, and felt as though his ears were on fire, and his head was going to explode. 
Alrigh Arry Potter? 
Yeah, said Harry, shaking his head. Yeah, thats right.
You best be getting on yer way back to th castle now, said Fridwulfa. These giants will be up soon, and they don take kindly to strangers. 
Harry, Ron, and Hermione agreed, and set off, back to the castle, dragging Wormtail the entire way.
I dont get why we dont kill him right now, said Ron when they reached the end of the forest. 
Because theres no way to get rid of the body, said Hermione. It will be discovered soon enough, just like your moms Harry, and then well be in trouble.
Lets just keep him with us until tomorrow, said Harry. When all the teachers get back from the election, we can turn him in.
Where will we keep him, though? asked Hermione.
Well, we cant take him into the dormitories, said Ron. 
Why dont we just dig a hole in the ground, and put him in it, suggested Hermione. Then in the morning, we can just come down, and get him. 
No, said Harry. Even though theres almost no chance of him escaping I still dont want to leave him out of my sight.
Well what are we going to do? asked Ron. Harry looked around, there had to be an answer somewhere. Then he saw it.
Hagrids cabin, said Harry. Hes at the Ministry of Magic voting, along with the rest of most of the wizarding world. We can spend the night in there with Wormtail, and no one would no the difference.
Sounds good, said Ron, slinging Wormtail over his shoulder. They all walked towards Hagrids cabin, and Hermione opened the door, using a spell. They walked inside, and it was even smaller than Harry had remembered it to be, probably because he had grown. There was only one bed, and a few large chairs.
Well, its better than sleeping on the grass, yawned Ron, throwing Wormtail on a chair, upside down.
Well have to get up early tomorrow, just before the teachers get back, said Harry. Ill set an alarm. Harry took out his wand. Zipnitrius!
A small jet of gas flew out of Harrys wand. It materialized a few feet away from him, and took the form of a small, golden alarm clock. 
Do you think its safe, going to sleep? asked Hermione. I mean You-Know-Who could be watching us, getting ready for another attack. He could surprise us during the night.
I dont think he will try again tonight, Hermione, said Harry. He probably thinks Wormtail is on his way to him with us, and he wont have time to come up with another plan until after the time Wormtail was supposed to arrive. Harry looked at Hermiones face she didnt seem to believe him.
Fine, said Ron, if it makes you feel any better, Ill set an alarm outside the hut. He got up from the chair he was lying down in, and walked outside. He came back a few seconds later.
Did you set the alarms? asked Hermione.
Sure did, said Ron. Hermione smiled, and curled up in the bed, looking much happier. Ron whispered to Harry,
I didnt set any alarms, I dont know the spell. Even if I did, its not worth it. Harry smiled, and shook his head. His friend was very weird.. Harry yawned, and sat down in a chair slowly falling into unconsciousness.
RRIINNGG! screamed the alarm clock what felt like seconds later to Harry, but was actually several hours. He sat up from his chair, and tapped the clock with his wand. It disappeared into thin air. He rubbed his eyes, put on his glasses, and the world came into focus. Ron and Hermione were already up. Ron was tending to a fire he made in Hagrids fireplace, and Hermione was sitting in front of it.
What are you doing up? yawned Harry, standing up and stretching. 
Couldnt sleep, they both said together. Harry shrugged, he never lost sleep because of fear. 
Come on, said Ron. We have to get out and watch for the teachers, and if they get here fast enough, we may still have time for breakfast. I know Im starving. Harry nodded groggily, though agreeing with him, he was rather famished as well. They all stood up slowly, not wanting to leave the warmth of the fire, and stepped outside the hut. It was bitter cold outside, and he had left all his winter clothes in the castle. Hermione must have noticed this, because the next second, Harry felt warmth from a small conjured fire spread all over him. Hermione had a little bottled fire.
They waited outside, looking up at the sky for quite a while, until they saw the first broomstick fly into the castle. Several more followed it, Harry kept a look out for Mrs. Figg. It wasnt took long before he saw her. She was on a bright red broom, wearing a long black cloak. 
Harry indicated her to Ron and Hermione. Hermione shot a small green beam at her that shot right by. Mrs. Figg looked around for where it came from. She spotted the three of them on the ground and flew down.
So, who won the election? asked Harry.
We wont know for several weeks months probably. The Ministry likes to take its time with these things very long times, said Mrs. Figg.
Well, do you have any news for us, before we give you ours? asked Harry.
Not really, the only news I have is that the last phoenix Remus and Sirius found was lost for a few hours, but just as I was leaving the election a few minutes ago, Sirius, in his dog form of course, came and told me that they had just gotten it back.
Great, said Harry. I like good news.
Well, did you do it? asked Mrs. Figg, in a quiet voice, looking very cold, even with her many layers on. Harry smiled and nodded. Excellent work, Harry. I knew you could do it. Did you give her back to the giants?
Yes, said Harry.
Did you find out who stole it?
Yes we did, said Ron.
Well who did it?
Peter Pettigrew stole it, said Harry. The entire thing was a trap. He lured us into the forest, and then stunned us. Luckily Ron Harry didnt want to give away that Ron was an Animagus, even to Mrs. Figg, err- camouflaged himself, and he was able to free me, and we stunned Wormtail together. Mrs. Figg did not look happy at all about this story, even though it had a good ending.
Oh Harry! she whined. Ill never forgive myself! Are you sure you are okay? I knew I should have sent someone with you never mind that! I should have gone myself! I cant believe I put the stupid election before-
Mrs. Figg! yelled Harry, stopping her babbling. Its okay, none of us got hurt. Wormtail is not that smart, and we easily beat him.
Are you sure?
Yes, said Harry, Ron, and Hermione together.
Well then, said Mrs. Figg, looking slightly better, Im happy youre all okay. Do you, by any chance, still have Peter?
We sure do, said Harry. Hes right there, in Hagrids hut.
Excellent, said Mrs. Figg. Once we turn him in, Sirius will be officially free.
Harry smiled, now he might be able to officially leave the Dursleys, and go and live with Sirius. But, as he thought about thatdid he really want to leave, now? Now that Dudley was being nice to him? Oh well, he thought. Hed have plenty of time to think about that later.
They all walked back to Hagrids hut, eagerly awaiting warming themselves in the fire they had made, and turning in Wormtail. When they arrived at the entrance to the hut, Harry turned to them.
Ladies and gentlemen now presenting the filthiest, most evil person I personally know Peter Pettigrew! he threw open the door, and bowed towards them. Mrs. Figg had a confused look upon her.
Well, where is he? she asked.
What do you mean? asked Harry, looking inside.
Where is he? she asked again. Harry looked inside the hut again, but Wormtail was nowhere to be seen. 

Chapter 21- The Yule Ball 
What!? yelled Harry, Ron, and Hermione together.
He was just in here! yelled Harry.
We just left him for a minute or two or more. said Ron.
How could he have left? He was unconscious! squeaked Hermione. The three of them tore the hut apart. They left no book unturned, and no corner uninspected. They looked for several minutes, but the only trace they could find of Wormtail a small pile of ash, right in the middle of the hut. If it wasnt for Mrs. Figgs warning of Hagrid returning, they would have all kept searching for the rest of their lives.
Hurry! she yelled. Hes coming!
Katheti Repairo! yelled Harry, Ron, and Hermione as the same time, pointing their wands in various spots. Wherever their wands hit, everything that had originally belonged in that spot, flew there. Within seconds, everything was back to where it should be. Just as they were running out, Hermione shot some water on the fire, putting it out. 
They shot out of the hut with Mrs. Figg, going the long way around back to the castle, to avoid Hagrid. They saw him arrive back at his hut, and walk inside, unaware of anything that had occurred while he was away.
Oh no, Ron! yelled Hermione. Did you get rid of you alarms? Harry saw Rons expression, he looked as though he were going to explode with laughter.
Sure he managed to get out. Yeah, I uh- did it as we were running out
Oh good, said Hermione as they got up and started walking back to the castle. They arrived back at the Great Hall, to Rons delight, right as breakfast was starting. They said good bye to Mrs. Figg, and sat down at the Gryffindor table, stuffing themselves with whatever they could find. When they finally stuffed themselves, the question of Wormtail came up.
So how could he have left? asked Ron, wiping his mouth. I mean he couldnt have just gotten up and walked away.
And he couldnt have apparated away either, said Hermione. 
Well said Harry. Maybe he was just pretending to be unconscious, waiting for when we were out of his sight, and then make a run for it.
No, we would have still seen him come out of the hut, said Hermione.
So, the only way he couldve left, without us seeing him, is if he disappeared inside the hut, and then reappeared somewhere else, said Harry.
That describes Apparition perfectly, said Ron. He must have Apparated.
How many times have I told you! said Hermione, quite loudly. You cant Apparate on school grounds!
Maybe he maybe he killed himself, suggested Harry. Ron and Hermione looked at him, confused. 
What makes you think that? they asked together.
Well all that we could find of him was that pile of ash maybe he lit himself on fire.
Why would he do that? asked Ron. Its not a very good way of escaping.
Better to be killed than to be caught, said Harry. Thats probably what he was thinking. If he didnt kill himself, Voldemort would have killed him for failing his mission twice, and probably not as nicely as Wormtail would have liked it.
Still- said Ron, about to make another suggestion, when suddenly, Dumbledores voice boomed across the entire room.
Hello students, he said. Everyone in the Great Hall turned towards him, wondering what he had to say. Dumbledore didnt usually make announcements at breakfast it must have been important. Maybe it was about the election or maybe it was about Wormtail, Harry thought suddenly. Dumbledore did seem to know just about everything that went on in the castle, he mightve found out about what they had done last night. Maybe he was going to announce that he was taking away two hundred points from Gryffindor for their action. Harry swallowed hard.
I would like to talk about the election that was held yesterday.
Harry breathed a sigh of relief. 
I have been asked, and Im sure many teachers have been asked, who the new Minister of Magic is. I would just like to remind you all that we will not know the results of the election for several months possibly not until the last few days of school. But, rest assured, I will make an announcement on who the winner is when the time comes. 
Also, it has come to my attention that there is a rumor of a dance spreading around this school. While, at first, I knew of no such thing, I consulted the teachers, and they think it would be a great thing to have one especially in light of current situations. He waited a few seconds for people to think about what he had just said. He was talking about Voldemorts return, Azkaban being taken over, and the resignation of the Minister of Magic. So, we have decided that on Christmas day, we will have another Yule Ball. Only this time, students of all ages are invited. I ask you all to come, and enjoy yourselves. Now, Im sure you all have much more important things to do today instead of hearing me blab, so go ahead! He sat down, and all the people that were turned toward him suddenly shot in all directions, to do homework, to ask people to the dance or, 
Animagus lessons, said Hermione. Professor McGonagall told me yesterday, when she came to watch the end of your duel.
Harry groaned. Even though it was fun learning how to transform, he still had many other things he would prefer to have been doing, like talking to Cho. But, he dragged himself to the Transfiguration room, alongside Ron and Hermione.
The lesson took almost the entire day, but it was worth it. By the time Professor McGonagall announced it was finally over, Ron could transform the head, the body, and the tail of a chameleon but not the legs or the arms yet. He looked very funny, a chameleon with human arms and legs.
Hermione was also doing very well. She was able to become the dimensions of a medium-sized unicorn, and she could transform her legs and back into a horses. When she was fully transformed like that, she looked like a female centaur, only she had a horn coming out of the top of her head.
Harry was moving along too. He could now transform the body and tail of the gryffin. The only thing he couldnt do yet was the face, the hardest part, since it was extremely detailed, and required much concentration. 
Malfoy had still never turned up for a single lesson. By the end of class, Harrys curiosity about him was almost overwhelming. What animal had he chosen? Had he done more than one? He approached Professor McGonagall.
Professor? he asked shyly.
Yes, Potter? she asked.
Well, I was just wondering about Malfoy. What animal, or animals, did he choose? Professor McGonagall looked up from her work.
I would like to tell you Potter, and I feel as though I should but I cannot.
Why?
Because Mr. Malfoy has asked me to keep his lessons private, his transformations private, and what animals he has chosen private. He will show you what he has done in good time.
But, why does he want to keep it a secret? asked Harry.
Im sure Mr. Malfoy has his reasons, Mr. Potter, she said. Now please, this lesson has taken most of my time for today, and I have to get all this done, and more, before vacation starts.
Yes, Professor, said Harry, leaving, feeling slightly disappointed. He ran out after Ron and Hermione, not knowing any more about Malfoy than he had when he first came into the lesson this morning. 
The next week want by fast for Harry, they didnt do much in their classes, the teachers were busy trying to grade all their assignments. The only class they did much of anything in was, as usual, Care of Magical Creatures where they spent most of their class time trying to get their dragons under control, most of which were now the size of large elephants. 
The Dueling Club had also started meeting on a regular basis. Since Harry was the captain, all decisions about the club went through him. After voting for a while, they decided that they would have one more big duel like they had before, only it would include two on two, three on three, and three on one matches. They also decided that, the day after the Quidditch final, they would hold a giant dueling tournament in the Great Hall during dinner for everyone to see. 
Since the Christmas holidays were approaching, a list was being set up for students to sign up on, if they wanted to stay at Hogwarts for the vacation. This was the first time Harry had to actually think about whether or not he wanted to go or stay for the holidays, since he and Dudley were friends now. But, when he saw that Ron and Hermione had already signed up to stay, and he remembered the dance with Cho that he had to go to, Harry quickly joined them on the list, along with many other names of people that were staying for the holiday, probably for the dance. As Harry was signing it, he noticed a new flier on the bulletin board. 
Attention all house-elves, Harry read off the sheet. During Christmas Day (December 25th) you will all be given the day off from work. Any elf seen working will be given clothes. The day after (December 26th) any and all house elves are invited to come to Professor Dumbledore, and all those who do will be given payment and vacation days for the rest of their career at Hogwarts.
Whats that all about? asked Ron, then he looked at Hermione. Do you have anything to do with this? Hermione turned pink, and smiled.
Well yes, she said. 
I thought you said you were through with spew, said Ron.
Its S.P.E.W., said Hermione, and no, Im not through with it. I talked to Professor Dumbledore about it. At first, I thought the students and the elves could switch places for a day, and we could all see what being a house elf is like. But, he didnt think anyone would be willing to participate in it, so we compromised to just give them a day off. 
But, how will the dance work, without the elves? asked Harry. 
What do you mean? asked Hermione.
Well, last year, the elves made all the food, and helped out, said Harry. How will we be able to make the dance a success without them?
Oh, thats right, said Hermione, Professor Dumbledore said something about that. He said that the teachers will be doing the cooking, and everything the house elves would normally do.
Oh man, said Ron, sounding disappointed.
What is it? asked Hermione. Did you want to do the work?
No way, said Ron. Its just that, the only year Snape is not here is the one year I would get to see him in an apron and a chefs hat.
The Christmas holidays finally arrived, and Harry could not be happier. 
Finally, he thought to himself, as he collapsed on his bed. An entire two weeks without any classes, Animagus lessons, Quidditch practices, or Dueling Club meetings. All there is to do is sleep.
Harry, came a voice. Get up! Harry sat up from his bed, and looked around.
Why? he groaned. He saw that Ron was in the room.
Chos outside the portrait of the fat lady, she wants to see you, he said. Harry immediately jumped out of bed, and ran down the steps to the common room. He shot towards the main entrance, and opened the portrait door. 
Hello Cho, said Harry.
Hey Harry, she replied.
What is it?
We have to go to Hogsmeade, she said, smiling.
Um why? asked Harry.
Because we have to she looked like she was about to explode, buy dance clothes!
But, Cho, said Harry. I already have some and Im sure you have some
Oh, yes but they dont match do they? she said. Anyway, we have to go now, before there is a big rush! She grabbed Harry by the hand, and ran with him down to the Quidditch field. There, they picked up their brooms, and flew to Hogsmeade.
Well, its not as bad as it could be, thought Harry to himself. However, when they arrived at the store that sold high quality dress robes, Harry realized that what he had thought earlier was totally wrong. He would have preferred to be fighting Wormtail, while playing a Quidditch match, and learning to transform, all at the same time, inside Azkaban, than be doing what he was now.
This is torture, thought Harry as Cho tried on another dress. It was her twenty-fifth one that she had tried on in the past two hours. Even though she didnt care for most of them, she still had Harry carry them all over the store, slowly weighing him down, more and more. 
And that wasnt even the worst part. Cho was very wrong about beating the dance rush, because the entire store was packed with Hogwarts students, all eager to find the best clothes for the dance. Harrys small bit of salvation arrived when he saw Seamus Finnigan, a fellow Gryffindor fifth-year there, also holding piles of dresses. They talked for what felt like three seconds, when Parvati Patil came over, and dragged Seamus over to try on some more dresses. 
After what felt like an eternity, Cho finally found a dress she was happy with. It looked almost exactly like her Hogwarts robe, only it wasnt as long, and,
Its emerald green, said Harry.
Is that a problem? asked Cho.
Oh, no! said Harry. Not at all! Thats the color of my dress robes.
Oh, too bad. That means we dont have to buy you some new ones, said Cho, actually sounding sad.
Yeah, too bad, said Harry, trying not to sound ecstatic. They left the shop, and the hundreds of people inside it, with Harry only carrying one dress now, and they went back to Hogwarts. 
When they arrived back, it was extremely late. Harry didnt realize how long they had spent shopping at the dress store. He said good bye to Cho, and gave her a kiss, then ran back to the common room, where everyone was leaving for dinner. Harry found Ron and Hermione, and went downstairs with them. 
When they arrived in the Great Hall, Harry wasnt too surprised to see that there were not many people there. He was surprised, however, that Hermione was the only girl in the entire room.
I guess youre the only girl who doesnt care what shes wearing, said Ron. Hermione glared at him.
I do to care, she said. Dont you remember what I did last year? Just because I dont obsess over it doesnt mean I dont care.
Dont worry Hermione, said Ron. I meant that as a good thing. Now we dont have to waste our time going out and buying stuff like Harry did. That wasnt too much fun for you, was it Harry?
Dont remind me about it, said Harry, as he sat down and started eating. 
The next few days were very uneventful for Harry, compared with his normal life. Sleeping in until almost noon, coming down for lunch, playing exploding snap or chess with Ron and Hermione, and occasionally talking to Cho. Harry also had to sneak out to Hogsmeade, to buy everyones presents. But, finally, Christmas Day came. Harry awoke to something being thrown into his face.
Ow! he yelled. It was hard, and a corner hit him, so it was very sharp. He rubbed his cheek, and put his glasses on, when he realized what had hit him: a present. 
Merry Christmas! said Ron, popping up from the end of his bed. You missed it, McGonagall brought all our presents up, and she almost collapsed afterwards. She wasnt allowed to use her wand because Dumbledore wants them to feel what its really like being a house elf.
Oh, too bad, said Harry groggily, unwrapping the present Ron threw at him. It was from Mrs. Weasley. It was the same thing she gave him every year, a green sweater with a big H on the front, along with some assorted cakes and other goodies. Harry saw that Ron had already opened his present from his mom because he was wearing a maroon sweater with a large R on it.
When will she ever understand that I dont like maroon? asked Ron, looking disdainfully at his shirt. Oh yeah, I almost forgot, Hermione wants us to bring our presents downstairs so we can open them all together but I dont think opening just one will matter much. 
Harry jumped out of bed, and grabbed his little pile of presents, Ron did the same. They ran down to the common room which was buzzing with excitement. They quickly spotted Hermione, who was waving frantically at them from a corner of the room. She also had a small pile of presents with her.
They spent the next hour opening gifts. Harry got mostly candy from people he knew: Ron, Hermione, Mrs. Figg, and Hagrid. Fred and George gave him some of their latest inventions: Soda Song Slurp, a beverage that forced you to talk only by singing, and you could stop only when you had a glass of water; Laughing Licorice, candy that, once you ate it, made you laugh after everything someone said, no matter how serious; and Six Second Salsa, a dip, that once you ate it, put you six seconds into the past or future, making for some very confusing situations.
All in all, it was a very good morning, made even better at breakfast. When they sat down at the table, there was no food in front of them. After a few seconds of being confused, Professor Dumbledore came up to them, dressed in an apron and chefs hat, with a few black marks all over him in various spots. Despite all this, he still had a smile on, and a twinkle in his eye.
Good morning, he said happily. Excellent idea, Hermione, giving the house elves today off its really made everyone realize how much they really help us. Just then, Professor McGonagall came over, with a large pot of something, and some bowls. She was dressed exactly like Dumbledore, only she had many more burns marks, and she was definitely not wearing a smile. She dunked a giant spoon into the pot, and poured out a white liquid into three bowls which she gave to each of them.
I hope you like porridge, she said. Its all we have time to make goodness knows how the house elves can do any more in the time they have.
Ron dipped his spoon into his bowl, and it exploded, leaving a large burn mark all over his face. 
I dont think its done quite yet, professor, said Ron, looking paralyzed. Professor McGonagall just sighed, and ran to another group of students who had just come in. When Dumbledore had left too, Harry and Hermione made their breakfast disappear by putting a hiding charm on them. Ron did the same, after recovering from his shock. Since they had a late start this morning, they decided to get ready for the dance, which would be starting in only a few hours. The way back to the common room, however, was littered with house elves, bored out of their minds. They were desperately looking for work, asking all who passed if they needed any help. 
Need a shoe shine, sir? squeaked one of the elves, sitting down and leaning against the wall, brandishing a cloth.
How about a little snack, sir? piped another. Your shirt washed, perhaps?
Need a change of clothes, sir? An entire wardrobe maybe? said another, grabbing onto Harrys robes.
No, thats okay, said Harry, brushing him off. 
Whats wrong with you elves? asked Hermione, stopping, turning around, and looking slightly annoyed. 
We needs work, miss, said three of them in unison.
But this is your day off, said Hermione. Youre supposed to be out, having fun! Do something you like!
But, we likes work miss, said one of the elves. And besides, house elves are not supposed to haves fun! We is supposed to work!
Are you insane? yelled Hermione, making the elves back away in fear. Each and every one of you is entitled to live just as full and happy a life as any wizard is!
But miss, said the same elf, our lives is work. We is supposed to work!
Cant you see, said Harry, now feeling an initiative to speak, youre not our slaves, and we dont want you to feel as though you are! If we treat you like slaves, than we are no better than Voldemort himself!
But sir, said a new elf, of course you is greater than he. He is a terrible man! He has done-
But was has he done to you that is worse than what we currently do? yelled Harry. We force you to work every day of your lives, for no pay, and no breaks! And if you screw up, most of your masters punish you severely! How is that any better than what he would have you do?
The elves stayed quiet after this statement. Hermione was beaming at Harry, thankful that he had taken an initiative. Then, it looked as though one of the elves was going to respond to what Harry said, when suddenly, an elf came bouncing down the hallway, and crashed right into Harry.
Oh! I is so sorry sir! it said. Harry recovered from the surprise, and looked at the elf. It was wearing giant socks that did not match at all: one was orange with purple dots, and the other was rainbow colored. It was green short shorts on, and a long red and yellow tie. Harry did not even have to look at its round face to see who it was.
Hello, Dobby, said Harry, brushing himself off.
Oh! Mr. Harry Potter! I is so sorry and if-
You see, said Harry, grabbing hold of Dobbys shoulders, and wheeling him around so that he stood right in front of him. This is what you all should be like! Express yourselves like him! Be like him! See how happy he is, with vacations and pay? The other elves looked at Dobby as if he were a freak, or a disease. Something with which none of them wanted to associate themselves with.
But, Dobby is different. squeaked some of the elves.
And thats what you all should be, said Harry. If theres one thing that makes wizards so great is that each and every one of them is different than every other. If we were all the same, no progress would be made, and Voldemort would have taken over long ago! You elves need to be different from each other, not the same, not working every second of every day, you need to do stuff and time to do it! 
So, I tell you all now, tomorrow, when you are given the opportunity to get payment and vacation time, I urge now, I am telling ordering you all to take it! Do it, if not for your own good, then for your species good, and all the wizards of the worlds good!
Ron and Hermione burst into applause, and Dobby gave a little clap. The rest of the elves looked as though they had seen a horror movie, and immediately ran away from Harry, giving whimpers and screams.
Well, I dont know if your speech did any good, Harry, said Hermione, but thanks for showing that you care.
How did you think of all that stuff to say? asked Ron.
I just suddenly thought that we were treating the elves just how Voldemort would, and I dont want anything in common with him, said Harry. But then, he looked at himself. He shared a lot with Voldemort: his scar gave him Voldemorts power of Parseltongue, and his wand had a feather in it from Fawkes, just like Voldemorts, and Harry even looked like Voldemort used to: black hair, and skinny. He and Voldemort were practically related.
Come on Harry,  said Ron and Hermione, we have to get ready for the dance. They bid Dobby good bye, and set off for their dormitories. It was really only Hermione who needed time to get ready, she wanted to fix her hair, and change into something really nice, which would take a while. All Harry and Ron had to do was slip on their robes, and maybe run a comb through their hair.
In their room, Harry and Ron met Dean and Seamus, their fellow fifth years. They were sitting on their beds, passing the time, while their dates got ready. Harry knew that Seamus was going with Parvati, but he didnt know who Dean was going with. Harry asked him, and he said he was going with Parvatis best friend: Lavender Brown. 
Just then, Neville popped into the room. Harry wondered if he had a date for the dance.
So, Neville did you ask anyone to the Yule Ball? asked Harry. 
Are you going with Ginny again? asked Ron. At the Yule Ball last year, Neville had gone with Ginny. Neville shook his round head.
Well then, who are you going with? asked Dean. Neville was turning red, and sweating.
Well err- youll find out he stuttered.
No, tell us! said Seamus, slipping on his dark red dress robe. 
Well Eloise Midgen said Neville quietly. Ron, Seamus, and Dean each held their mouths shut tight, trying to keep in their laughter until Ron could hold it no longer. He burst out laughing, and Dean and Seamus soon followed, rolling on the floor laughing. Neville turned as red as Seamus dress robe.
Its not funny, said Neville. I I was desperate
Better to go with no one than with her! sad Ron. 
Shes so like a troll! said Dean, rolling with laughter.
Her face is so bubbly and disgusting! cried Seamus, trying to keep his sides from splitting open. Neville just stood there with his head down.
Come on Neville,  said Ron, putting his hand on Nevilles shoulder, you can do better than her. Neville shrugged his hand off of his shoulder.
No I cant, he said, I
Youre sad! yelled Dean.
And pathetic! said Seamus. 
Harry thought that was too much, and Neville must have thought the same too. He ran out of the room, slamming the door. Harry could hear him wobbling quickly down the stairs. 
Did you see him? asked Seamus.
He ran out of the room like a little girl! said Dean, pulling his light yellow dress robe on. Harry just looked at Ron, and they both knew what they had to do. Ron sighed, and they walked out of their dormitory, and down to the common room, looking for Neville. They found him in a corner, he looked like he was crying. Harry and Ron walked over to him.
Whats wrong Neville? asked Harry, trying to sound sympathetic.
You know, said Neville.
Is it because we made fun of you for having Eloise for a date? asked Ron.
No, said Neville, its because I dont have a date for the dance.
But, what about Eloise? asked Harry. Neville shook his head.
I asked her, but even she said no I thought that she would gladly say yes but I couldnt believe it she said no. sobbed Neville.
Then why did you tell us she was coming with you? asked Ron.
I thought telling you I was at least going with someone would sound better than going with no one, said Neville. But I suppose I was wrong.
I cant believe Eloise said no whispered Ron in Harrys ear. 
Pathetic, isnt it? said Neville. He had heard them. The worst was rejected by the worst.
Neville, said Harry, you know what your problem is?
What?
You have no self esteem. You need some self confidence. Neville looked up at Harry, and wiped his eyes. He put his hand up to his forehead, looked like he was thinking, and then brought it back down.
Youre right, Harry, said Neville quietly. He walked towards the portrait of the fat lady, and left the common room. Ron and Harry were left alone in the common room, almost everyone else had left for the hall outside of the doors to the Great Hall to meet their dates for the dance.
Where do you suppose hes going? asked Harry.
Probably down to the dance, said Ron. Speaking of which, weve got to get ready! They ran back to their room, which was now clear of Dean and Seamus, and pulled their dress robes on. Harrys was the same as his last years, just a little bigger, but Rons was completely new: it was a light blue, it looked much better than his frilly maroon one he had last year. After they both cleaned up and combed their hair, though Harrys looked the same, they headed down to the entrance to the Great Hall. 
Harry immediately spotted Cho. She looked extravagant in her light green dress, and her silvery blonde hair was drawn up in a tight bun at the top with two black sticks poking through it. 
Hey Harry! she called to him. Harry said good bye to Ron, who started wandering off to look for Hermione.
Cho, said Harry. You look beautiful. Cho smiled at him.
You like quite handsome too, she said. 
When are they going to open the doors, and let us in? asked Harry.
Malfoy came by a few minutes ago and said theyd let us in soon. 
What? said Harry. Since when did Malfoy have an authority over the rest of them? Draco Malfoy came over here and told everyone that? Cho shook her head.
No, Lucius Malfoy came and told us, hes one of the chaperons for the dance. Harrys heart sank, and he felt clammy and cold. If Lucius Malfoy was going to be watching the dance, then thered certainly be more Death Eaters there probably trying to get to him again maybe they would succeed this time. 
Wh- why do we need chaperones? asked Harry.
To make sure kids dont go crazy, keep things under control, said Cho. The teachers cant do it, since they have to cook, and the Weird Sisters are coming again, and some of their new songs are much more insane than their last few.
Oh, youve grown up in the wizarding world, said Harry. You probably know all about the Weird Sisters, and the Wizarding Wireless.
What? said Cho. I didnt grow up in a wizard family, Harry! 
You you didnt?
Oh no, said Cho. Im a Muggle born. My dad was a doctor, and my mom is a teacher. It was quite a surprise when they found out I was a witch.
How did they find out?
Well, they officially found out when I got the letter from Hogwarts, but I guess they suspected something from my first little magic trick. I was in an operation room with my dad who was working on my grandfather, who was about to die. Suddenly, his heart gave out, and they pronounced him dead. They all left the room, and I touched his hand, and a jolt of lightning shot out of my fingers, right into his chest. That started his heart back up again, and my parents knew I was special.
Wow, Cho, said Harry, you saved someones life when you were little? All I did was make my hair long, and make some glass disappear. They both laughed, and Harrys forgot all about his worries and troubles for a few precious minutes, until Lucius Malfoy appearing before the mass of students eager to enter. Harry was reminded of the potential danger he was in tonight, and hoped Cho wouldnt get hurt.
Lucius Malfoy threw open the doors to the Great Hall, and everyone shuffled in, in awe of how it looked. There wasnt a single inch in the entire room that wasnt decorated in some way. The walls were glazed with an icy substance to make them look frozen. The ceiling was covered in large icicles that looked like they were made out of crystal rather than ice. There was a Christmas tree in every corner, and each one bent over slightly from hitting the ceiling. The trees had golden ornaments all over them, and lights were strung all over them. The trees almost looked alive, they were spinning a little, allowing everyone to see every part of it. The floor was covered in a fluffy fake snow, that changed to be all the colors of the rainbow in spots all over. 
Everyone filed in, and spread out all over. Just when everyone was in, Lucius Malfoy closed the doors, and the dance began. Out of the floor came a square floor, and white foam starting lightly spraying out from it. There were three figures on the pedestal, and the one in the middle snapped its fingers. An enormous lighted ball came down from the ceiling, and started spinning. The room grew brighter, and the three figures came in clearly. Harry recognized them from last year, they were the Weird Sisters. More, smaller light balls popped out from the ceiling, and started spinning as well, radiating all different colors.
The group started singing, and it was a lively tune. Cho grabbed Harry, and stopped right in the middle of the dance floor. She started dancing, by just moving randomly, and Harry immediately started doing the same. The rest of the student body flowed onto the dance floor, dancing the same as Harry and Cho. 
The song continued for several minutes, getting faster and more energetic all the time. Finally, it reached its climax, and slowed down, until it finally stopped. The students all clapped, and they were herded to tables that were set up. The tables were the four normal houses places, but they were all as decorated as the room was. They were clear and shiny, with a light, silvery cloth covering most of it. 
Harry and Cho sat down at the closest table, and Ron and Hermione joined them. Hermione looked just as extravagant as Cho; she was dressed in almost the exact same dress she wore last year, only this one was covered in shiny glitter and a lighter blue, very white. She also had her hair down differently: it was slick and down, not tied up in a bun. There were no curls like she usually had, and there were blonde highlights spattered through it. She smiled at Harry, her teeth shining.
Hello Harry, she said.
Hey Hermione, said Harry. 
Oh, hello Cho, said Hermione, seeing Cho look over, to see who Harry was talking to. Cho smiled, and put out her arm. Hermione took it, and they shook hands.
I dont believe weve ever met formally, said Cho. Im Cho Chang.
And Im Hermione Granger, said Hermione, letting go of their handshake. She presented Ron. And this is Ron Weasley.
Good to meet you, Ron, said Cho. Ron went very red, and sat back down next to Hermione. 
You have such nice friends, said Cho. 
I havent met any of your, said Harry. Where are they?
Oh, I dont expect theyll be coming to this party, said Cho. Theyre all seventh years, and are allowed to attend a different dance, the one in Hogsmeade. Its much larger than this one, and from what Im told, more fun.
More fun than this? said Harry. I doubt it! Just then, Professor Fletcher appeared before Harry, Ron, Hermione, and Cho. He had a big grin on, and looked excited.
What is it professor? asked Hermione. 
What would you like? he asked, barely moving his lips.
Like for what? asked Cho.
What would you like for dinner? he asked, reaching into a large pocket in his robe. He took out four sheets of parchment, and handed one to each.
These are the menus, he said. Choose what youd like, point to it with your wand, and it will be served to you as soon as the professors downstairs can fix it up. With that, he smiled at them once more, and left for the next row of students, giving them menus. 
Harry looked over the menu, everything on it seemed delicious. There were things on it from Hogwarts breakfast, lunch, and dinner feasts, holiday specials, desert goodies, and many other foods hed never heard of. Each item had a tiny picture of what it was next to it, and the more Harry looked at the menu, the hungrier he got. He had to choose something before he at the menu.
Ill take the ham and pineapples, said Harry, pointing at that choice on the magical menu. When the tip of his wand touched the text, it turned a magnificent white. The menu started to vibrate, and then the words peeled themselves off the paper. The words fluttered about the menu for a few seconds, like a bird just trying out its wings. It flew higher, just above Harrys head, then it shot off into a small hole in the wall, which probably led to the kitchens. 
There were a few seconds of awkward silence, as all eyes were on Harry, wondering if his food was going to come, and wondering where it would come from. Suddenly, the hole that the words shot through expanded, and grew a dark red. Something shot out of the hole, flying faster than any owl Harry had ever seen, and right in front of him. It was a silver platter. Harry nervously took the cover off, and saw what was inside. The smell was the first thing to get to him, and it was delightful. He took a deep breath, savoring the smell, trying to taste the food with his nose. Harry looked down, and before him was the most succulent ham with the shiniest pineapples hed ever seen. 
The Great Hall exploded with the sound of hundreds of people, ordering their meals. White words were flying all over the place in the air, trying to fight their way to the hole in the wall. Some words were knocked out of the sky by bigger ones, forcing the people who ordered them to try something else. 
Soon, all of the orders found and worked their ways through the hole. Everyone was staring at the hole in the wall, waiting for the orders to fly at them. Harry, meanwhile, was busy enjoying his meal, not noticing the silence, broken only by his chewing, and silverware clunking. 
The hole in the wall, already bigger from Harrys order, now grew fifty times its size, taking up almost the entire wall. A fiery glow appeared inside it, and then the room started to shake a little. Objects started flying out of the hole, zipping around the room for a second, then stopping in front of a student. The food shot out like Frisbees, flying all over, soaring through the air. Even though the air above the tables was chaotic, not a single drop of soup was spilled, not a single platter was shattered. Each arrived at the correct student, prompt and in perfect order.
Within a few seconds, every student had his or her dinner. The room was now filled with exclamations over how good it was, and asking for others to pass certain condiments. 
Well, so far so good, said Harry, his mouth full to Ron and Hermione. They looked at him, Ron with spaghetti still in his mouth, and Hermione with a spoonful of soup up to her mouth. 
What do you mean? asked Ron, quickly slurping up the noodles that were hanging out of his mouth.
I mean, said Harry, coming in closer to them so that Cho wouldnt overhear, that the chaperoning Death Eaters havent tried anything yet. Harry looked around, and saw that in addition to Lucius Malfoy, there were several others that were in Voldemorts circle. Harry didnt recognize only a handful of them. He hoped they would be enough to stop an attack.
What makes you think they would try something? asked Hermione. Harry gave her a look.
Hermione, he said, sighing, every place I go, Voldemort is trying to recruit me, I dont think this will be any exception.
I hope youre wrong, said Ron, spinning some more spaghetti on his fork. 
But, said Hermione, what I meant was, I dont think theyd try anything with Dumbledore here. I mean, even if he is in the kitchens, hes still here, and they wouldnt be able to get away with anything.
I hope youre right, said Ron, eating what he put on his fork. Harry shook his head, his best friend was a little weird. 
After almost an hour of eating dinner, everyone was finished, and full beyond belief. Once someone was done, their plate magically flew back through the hole, and to the kitchen where it would be cleaned. So, with everyone done, the room was spotless. 
The Weird Sisters came back to their podium, and started singing again, a signal for people to start dancing. Most were to stuffed to even think about dancing, but for others, their dates overpowered them. Seamus and Dean were dragged out by Parvati and Lavender, Fred and George were beckoned by Alicia and Angelina, and Harry and Ron were forced back by Cho and Hermione. They walked back out to the dance floor, and boogied with their partners.
This is my date dad, came a voice from over the heads of several students. Harry recognized it as Draco Malfoys. He wanted to know who Malfoy had brought, and who was stupid enough to come with him, so he said he wanted to go get something to drink to Cho, and walked over. When he saw who was Malfoys date, Harry almost fainted. He felt his heart skip a beat, and almost choked on the air in his mouth.
This is my date Ginny Weasley, said Malfoy. Sure enough, it was true. She was standing there, right next to him, looking happier than Harry had ever seen her; a real happiness, not one put on for show. Malfoys arm was around her shoulder, and he was smiling, awaiting his fathers reaction. It was a sickening sight.
Hello Miss. Weasley, said Mr. Malfoy nodding his head in her direction. He had a smirk on his face, that was slowly transforming into a grimace. He looked at her like she was something to be flushed down the toilet. Ginny said something to the Malfoys, and walked away, still smiling. 
What are you thinking, son? said Mr. Malfoy, leaning into his sons ear.
What do you mean? said Draco.
What do you think I mean! spat Mr. Malfoy. Id rather have you be with a Mudblood than with a Weasley! Arent there any wizarding familys girls in your class? Someone more like us.
But said Draco, I I love Ginny, father, said Draco. This was too much for Mr. Malfoy. He slapped his son across the face, and pointed a finger at him. Draco stood perfectly still, as though he were used to this treatment.
Now you listen to me, son, said Mr. Malfoy. After all Lord Voldemort has done for us for you this is NOT a good way to pay him back! Dating a Weasley, my god! What is wrong with you!? I expect that you will not warn her will you? And by the time the rooster crows tomorrow, I want her crying because you broke up with her! Is that understood? 
Yes father, said Draco, his head down. His father put his hand on his shoulder.
Its for your own good, he said as he walked off to another corner of the room.
What was going on? What could Malfoy warn Ginny about? How did Voldemort help Malfoy and his family? Just as all these thoughts were going through Harrys head, he felt a hand on his shoulder. He turned around, and saw Ginny. She was looking even better than Harry remembered. She had a yellow dress on that shone like the sun. She had her hair down differently, it came down far past her shoulders, looking very slick and shiny as well. In fact, the only thing bad about her was her expression. She looked as though she was going to yell at Harry.
Oh, hello Ginny, stuttered Harry.
What are you doing? she asked, putting her hands to her sides. 
I- I- I- I nothing, stammered Harry.
Why were you watching us? said Ginny.
You you saw me? asked Harry. Ginny rolled her eyes.
Me and half of the students here! With that dazed expression on your face and you staring straight at us, how could I have not noticed?
I Im sorry Ginny, said Harry. I just saw you and Malfoy and just wondered what was going on. Ginny sighed.
I know, its kind of strange right now, but I really like him, she said. And with that, she walked back to the Malfoys. 
By now, the song had ended, and Harry quickly ran to get some drinks, so Cho would not ask him about what he was really doing. He ran back to the table, trying not to spill the two glasses, and sat down next to Cho, Ron, and Hermione. Cho gladly took one, and started drinking it. Harry had to tell Ron what Ginny was doing.
Um Ron said Harry.
Yeah, Harry? asked Ron.
Do you well do you know who Ginnys date is? 
No, why? he said. How could he say it nicely? Then, there was nothing nice about Malfoy, so Harry just said it blatantly.
Shes here with Malfoy. Rons eyes grew twice their size and he turned red. He sat up, looking like a robot, and started walking in the direction of where Ginny was. Harry ran up to him, to stop him before he killed someone.
Ron! yelled Harry, pressing against him so that he couldnt move. Ron! I think its okay! He couldnt bring himself to say that Malfoy was planning to dump her later tonight.
It doesnt matter, said Ron, continuing to move.
Ron! yelled Harry. You dont want to embarrass her? Do you? Ron stopped in his tracks, and turned backwards, facing Harry.
No, I want to protect her, said Ron.
You killing Malfoy will not protect her, said Harry. It will only make her hate you, and feel embarrassed. Ron stopped where he was.
Youre right, he said.
Dont worry, said Harry, leading him back to their table, if anything happens to her, Ill help you kill Malfoy.
I dont want to wait until he does something, said Ron. Harry gritted his teeth. He had to try and change the subject for a while.
So have you seen Neville around here anywhere? asked Harry.
No, said Ron, Come to think of it I havent seen him since he left the common room. I wonder where he is. 
Any thought of Neville, however, quickly faded away as the band started a new song. Cho and Hermione came running out to Harry and Ron, and they danced again.
Hour passed quickly, and the Yule Ball was coming to an end. A few students had already left, it was getting late. Among them were Malfoy and his cronies, Harry and Ron were happy to be rid of them. After the latest song had ended, the group of four sat down at their table, sweating from vigorously dancing for the past few hours. 
So what do you think? asked Harry to the group at the table. Should we call it a night, or what?
I think youre right, said Hermione, yawning and stretching.
I would have to concur as well, said Ron.
Oh sure, you sound elegant NOW, said Hermione. Ron, you really need to take some dancing lessons. Just as they were laughing over how Ron had tripped and fallen on Hermione during a song, an giant explosion rang out in the hall. Blowing everything into the air.

Chapter 22- The Aftermath
Harry instinctively covered his ears from the sound of it; it was incredibly loud, it sounded as though the explosion was coming from right next to him. He looked around him. People, chairs, table, decorations, everything was flying through the air, crashing into walls and the ceiling.
As the sound of the explosion died down, Harry let go of his ears, and looked up, and saw that the explosion had occurred right next to him. Right in the middle of the dance floor, there was a massive abyss. Several students were inside it, groaning. Harry ran over, covering his mouth from the smoke, about to help, when several more, smaller explosions rang out, all over the Great Hall. Harry didnt have time to look where each of them were exactly coming from, but he heard several coming from the walls, from the ceiling, and more from the floor. Harry collapsed onto the floor from the force of the explosions.
The air was now filled with sounds of screaming and coughing. Harry looked up, but his glasses fell off. Suddenly, he felt the presence of someone before him. Harry looked up slowly, expecting to see Voldemort himself standing right in front of him, ready to recruit him into his army of darkness. But instead, he saw Dumbledore. Even with his glasses off, Harry could tell who it was. There was no twinkle in his eye, however, he had a stern look to him. 
He pointed his wand at Harry, and said something. Harry felt renewed strength flow through his body, and his glasses come back onto his face.
What happened, professor? asked Harry, getting himself up.
I dont know, Harry, said Dumbledore. He started walking over to the other students, waking them up, just like he did to Harry. 
Theres more over here, Dumbledore! came a voice from far in a corner. Harry looked over to see who it was, and saw that it was Mr. Malfoy, trying to look as though he had nothing to do with this incident. Harry knew this was all his fault, this was the thing he didnt want his son to warn Ginny about. Harry clenched his fists, filled with rage. But, he had more pressing matters than revenge: he had to find his friends. 
Harry ran back to the table, which was covered in ash and smoke. He looked all over for any sign of Cho, Ron, or Hermione, but couldnt find anything. He then had an idea to look under the table, and saw each of them under there, huddled together.
Are you okay!? yelled Harry, crawling towards them.
Yeah, coughed each of them. 
What happened? asked Ron. He had ash all over his face.
We dont know, said Harry.
We? said Hermione. She had black marks all over her face, smearing her makeup everywhere; she looked like a disaster.
I talked to Dumbledore, said Harry quickly. But I know what happened. This is just another one of Voldemorts plans to get me! Weve got to get out of this room, and fast, before he gets here!
He got them all up, and propped Cho on his shoulder, who looked extremely pale, and felt weak. They walked their way passed the bodies on the floor, and the overturned tables, and the food that lay rotten on the floor. 
They got to the door, and Harry kicked it open. To his surprise, Draco Malfoy stood before them, with a shocked expression on his face. 
What? yelled Harry. Are you amazed that Im not dead or with Voldemort yet?! He walked passed Malfoy, but he grabbed him. 
Shut up, Potter. Just shut up, he said. Wheres Ginny? Did she leave like I told her to?
Oh, Im sure shes just what? You you still told her to leave, even after what your dad said? stuttered Harry, amazed that Malfoy would betray his father.
Of course I did! spat Malfoy as he burst into the Great Hall. I never betray friends, and I certainly never betray the ones I love!
Harry, Ron, Hermione, and Cho stood there, perplexed and amazed. They had never seen even a shred of good in Malfoy, and now they were seeing a whole new side of him that none of them had ever gotten so much of a glimpse of.
Whats going on? came a voice from behind them. I heard a noise. Harry turned around to see who it was, and was relieved to see that it was Ginny. Ron ran up to her.
Oh Ginny! he yelled. Youre safe! Fred and George suddenly came running out of the Great Hall, coughing.
We heard some maniac yelling for Ginny, said Fred, and we were wondering where she is.
Do any of you know where started George, just seeing that Ginny was okay. They walked up to her.
Are you okay? they both said to her. She didnt look okay, she looked quite annoyed and angry.
Of course I am! she blurted out, pushing them away. Im not a little kid anymore, I can take care of myself! Just then, Malfoy appeared in the doorway, along with many other students who were getting out of their shock from the explosion.
Ginny! he yelled when he saw her. He ran up to her, and put his arms around her. Thank god youre alright. Fred and George looked horrified, seeing Malfoy embrace Ginny like that. They tore him off of her.
What do you think youre doing!? yelled George. Malfoy was looking scared, he may be a good fighter, but he couldnt take on two at once.
I I well
Its okay, said Ginny, forcing her way between the twins. She held Malfoys hand, and they started waling down the hall together, talking back and forth to each other. As they were walking down, Fred and Georges jaws seemed to fall further to the floor, in disbelief of what had just happened.
How can Ginny? She likes him! stuttered Fred.
I think its nice, said Cho, finally recovering from her shock. Maybe thats just what Malfoy needs to warm up his heart. Harry smiled at her, he could count on Cho to always look on the bright side of things.
Attention, all students report to the Great Hall, boomed a voice in the hallway. This was the first time Harry had ever heard an announcement in school, but he was certainly going to follow it. They all walked back into the Great Hall, knowing what the announcement was going to be about.
The Great Hall retained no more of its former glory. All the icicles on the ceiling had fallen to the floor and shattered, the Christmas trees had all fallen over, and their ornaments were everywhere, in pieces. The fluffy multicolored snow that had adorned the floor was now a dark black all over. The tables that had looked so magnificent were now overturned and broken all over. The Weird Sisters podium was destroyed, as were their instruments. The Weird Sisters themselves seemed to be okay, Harry saw them tending to themselves with their wands, shooting gauze over their wounds.
Over where the dance floor used to be, there was now a huddled mass of students, gathered around Madam Pomfrey. She was trying to heal them all as well as she could, as fast as she could, and it seemed to be working well, except she looked as though she may explode, the way her hair was all frizzled, and her face all red. 
Now all the professors were in the Great Hall, each of them was still dressed in their cooking clothes, except for Dumbledore, who had taken them off. They were all trying to heal some students that were still on the floor, or in one of the many holes that lay blasted on every surface in the room. 
Attention, yelled Dumbledore, his voice magically magnified, we have just figured out the cause of this tragedy.
Harry was ready, he could feel the excitement of revenge flowing through him. Dumbledore knew that some of the chaperones were Death Eaters, and that this was an attempt to try and terrorize and involuntarily recruit new servants for Voldemort. 
The cause of this was magical text.
What!? yelled Harry, Ron, and Hermione together, quite loudly. Some of the healed students looked at them, wondering what they meant.
As you may have noticed, some of the magical orders didnt make it to us. The ones that didnt fell to the floor, and appeared to disappear. They did not disappear, however. Since all of your menus are immensely complex, and we had to make hundreds of them in a short time, quickly and efficiently, we were forced to use an experimental copying spell that uses highly unstable elements, and has not been tested extensively. When the words fell to the floor, they absorbed the elements in the wood, making it explosive. The friction from the hours of having people dance all over the floor gave the giant bomb enough heat to finally go off.
Most students stood there, looking at Dumbledore with glazed eyes. Not many of them had gone to Muggle schools, so they never took science courses. All they understood was magic. They didnt know what friction and unstable meant. Harry, however, had been to Muggle school (and did quite well), and understood. But, he knew there had to be more to it.
I apologize to all of you that were hurt that would be all of you. But, the most serious injuries were only a mild cause of a bruise, and a few faints. Im sorry to say that you are all still expected to go on with your lives, and report to your common rooms. Since it is now past midnight, Christmas is officially over, and the house elves should be eager to clean this up. The Great Hall will be ready for your use tomorrow.
As if by magic, at least sixty house elves popped into the Great Hall, and started cleaning up. Even after just few minutes, the Great Hall was looking much better. Seeing that everyone was alright, people then started heading back to their common rooms. Harry, however, wanted to talk to Dumbledore.
Excuse me, Headmaster, said Harry.
Yes Harry? What is it? said the old man.
Well, I was just wondering do you think there could be more to what happened here tonight, like, Voldemort influenced?
I dont doubt it for a second, Harry, said Dumbledore, waling off, but, innocent until proven guilty, so I cant say anything yet.
Harry took a minute to understand, and then walked back to his group. They all walked out of the Great Hall, Harry kissed Cho goodbye, and they went their separate paths to their common rooms. It took a while to get back to the Gryffindor common room for Harry, Ron, and Hermione, they had to fight their way through crowds of people all over, still confused, and talking about what had happened. When they got back to the portrait of the Fat Lady, however, they came before a disturbing sight: Malfoy kissing Ginny. As soon as they saw the three of them, they broke apart, and brushed themselves off, trying to pretend nothing had happened. 
Ahem, um thanks for the great night, Ginny Ill uh, see you later! said Malfoy, walking off.
See you Draco, said Ginny, giggling.
Ginny! said Ron. You showed him where our common room is!
Well, we know where theirs is, whispered Harry to Ron. In their second year, they had discovered where the Slytherin Common room was.
Well, its not like I told him the password, said Ginny sternly. A question had been burning in Harrys mind for a while, so he decided it was time to ask.
Ginny, he asked, how did you and Draco meet? Ginny blushed.
It was quite a while ago, actually, she said, sounding as if she were floating. He was talking to Professor Fletcher about getting some pieces of an animal I dont remember exactly. Anyway, I came down to do some extra credit for potions, and he was walking up the stairs I was going down. We both werent looking, and we crashed into each other. He said, Watch where you going you you beautiful person. And he looked into my eyes, I looked into his, and it just happened I guess.
Everyone smiled at this story, even Harry had to admit it was pretty nice. Then Neville suddenly came running up the stairs to the Gryffindor common room. He was looking oddly confident, though slightly shaken at the same time. 
Hey Neville! said Harry. Where have you been? Neville stopped, and looked at Harry. His facial expression was different too: he looked like he was smiling, and his eyes were bigger. He looked happy. He was also wearing different clothes a long black shirt.
Oh, I went to the Hogsmeade Party, said Neville in a monotone voice. Everyones jaw dropped.
You went there! yelled everybody. Neville grinned.
Yeah, he said. He patted Harry and Ron on their shoulders. Got just what I needed thanks you guys, Ill never be the same again Gootays. The door swung open, and Neville popped inside, everyone else stayed outside, dumbstruck.
I cant believe Neville? Went wow. stuttered Ron. 
Harry felt happy for Neville but he just couldnt stop feeling that there was something he was hiding from them. 


Chapter 23- Second Round
After Christmas vacation, it was back to regular work for Harry and the rest of the school. The O.W.L.s looked much closer this side of the holidays, and Harry and Ron started studying almost as obsessively as Hermione. Though they werent left with much free time after classes, Animagus lessons, Quidditch practice, and the Dueling Club, they still manage to squeeze in a few minutes each day to study at the library, absorbing any book they could find, trying to learn everything they could.
I still cant believe that almost all of the house elves decided to take pay and vacation days! exclaimed Hermione (during one of those such study sessions) for the fifth time that day. After the immense success of her idea, she just kept going on and on about it, never stopping.
Okay, Hermione, said Harry. We know youre happy for the house elves, but please, stop telling us every five minutes.
You know what, said Ron, we go through all of this time studying, and we dont even know what the O.W.L.s are going to be like! I mean, are they going to be written, hands-on, or what? Fred, George, Percy, Charlie, and Bill have all told me the same thing: It changes every year, so even if we told you, it wouldnt help.
Oh Ron, said Hermione, briefly looking up from a book, you could have asked me anytime! I already asked all the teachers what its going to be like this year months ago, back at the beginning of the year.
Well said Harry and Ron.
They told me that every class will have two O.W.L.s available: an Average O.W.L., and an Advanced O.W.L. This means we each can get a possible total of sixteen O.W.L.s. To get the Average O.W.L., you have to pass a written exam, and to get an Advanced O.W.L., you have to pass a hands-on exam, a challenge.
Do you know what the Advance O.W.L challenges are? asked Harry. Hermione shook her head.
No, and we wont know until the day of the tests.
Why cant they tell us what the challenges are? asked Ron. I mean, we know what the tests will be on, why cant we know what the Advanced ones will be on? Hermione was about to answer, when Harry spoke,
Because if they told us what the Advanced tests were, it would defeat the entire purpose of having it be Advanced. It tests our ability to face fear, danger, and adapt to the current situation. Hermione nodded.
Thats exactly right, she said. Its what all the teachers told me. Ron groaned.
It seems the more I think and find out about the O.W.L.s, the more Im not looking forward to them.
The days continued along like that, quite uneventful. Harry was becoming more and more fearful of Voldemort. Why was he waiting so long to come for Harry himself? Why didnt he just launch an all out attack on the school? The lack of dark activity was almost unnerving. Harry also began to dread his classes which became horribly boring; all they did was review their first, second, third, and fourth year work. They didnt learn anything new. Even Hagrid chained up the dragons so that they could spend the next few weeks reviewing. 
Harry welcomed Quidditch practice with open arms. It was great to fly away from the boringness of the classes. He was also especially looking forward to the next Dueling Club meet, and when the day came for it, he was very excited. 
It was late at night, and Animagus lessons had just ended. By now, all of them could transform their entire bodies to their animal forms. They were now working on staying like their animal for long periods of time. While it wasnt hard to transform just one part of your body, and keep it that way for a long time, staying the entire animal for extended periods of time was very tiring, and even painful. 
Harry, Ron, and Hermione each walked down to the Great Hall, excited about their Dueling matches. Tonight they would be doing groups against other groups, it should be interesting. They entered the massive room, and it looked just like it did before: the tables were pushed against the wall, and there was a giant open space in the middle. Most of the students were already there, in fact Harry, Ron, and Hermione were the last to arrive. Cho waved to Harry as he entered the ring of duelers. Professor Flitwick was there again, only this time he was not flying in the air, he was on a giant chair at the front of the room. He had two big, black cubes on either side of him. 
Well, it looks as though were all here, said Professor Flitwick, sitting down (he was taller sitting down than he was standing), so lets get started! I have here, on my left, a box. When I tap it with my wand, either a 1-2, 1-3, 2-2, 2-3, or 3-3 will appear. This will tell us which kind of duel we will have. On my right, I have another box. When I tap it with my wand, the students names that will participate in this duel will appear, clustered in groups showing you which team you will be on. The winners of the round will continue to play, but the losers will have their names taken out of the memory of the box. This is the easiest and fastest way to randomly choose dueling groups, and it should be a lot of fun. I wish luck to you all especially those of you who will have to face three others at once.
Everyone exchanged nervous and excited glances. Everyone was ready to escape from their dull school life with a good duel.
Our first duel is Professor Flitwick tapped the left box with his wand. A giant, red, 2-2 appeared, a two against two match with he tapped the right box, and four names appeared on the from of the box. Two were together, and two others were on the other side. Mr. Gregory Goyle and Mr. Vincent Crabbe against Miss. Ginny Weasley and Mr. Tci!
There was a very loud silence as the four competitors gathered in the center of the circle, and the rest of the students backed away. Ginny and Tci came together on one side, Crabbe and Goyle on the other. Ginny and Tci said something to each other, a plan probably, and Crabbe and Goyle just smirked. They held their wands out, in dueling position. Ginny did the same, but Tci insisted on repeating his normal dueling stance. He grabbed his Swand out of his sheath, and took his jacket off.
Get ready, said Professor Flitwick, looking excited, three twoone go!
Expelliarmus! said Ginny and Tci together.
Kooverta Maximus! yelled Crabbe. 
Bakatcha! yelled Goyle.
Crabbes spell came into effect first. A giant, light-blue beam came out of his wand, and materialized in front of himself and Goyle. It became a giant transparent window, barely visible. The disarming spells hit it, but stopped there, absorbed by the shield. Goyles spell hit the front of the shield, making it glow a brilliant yellow. When the glow died down a bit, the shield had turned into a mirror. Now the shield wouldnt just absorb attacks, it would reflect them back. Tci and Ginny were in trouble.
They, however, didnt seem to care that there was a giant mirror blacking their spells, or that Crabbe and Goyle gave each other a high five, and laughed. Tci just stepped back, and Ginny walked forward. Ginny then started moving her wand in a very hard motion, aiming right in front of Tci, as if there was something on her wand that she was trying to shake off.
Emfi Balaki! Emfi Balaki! Emfi Balaki! she yelled each time she pointed her wand. Each time she did that, a ball the size of baseball popped out, and landed in front of Tci. They looked very hard, heavy, and metallic. Once there were about twenty balls, Tci pointed his Swand at them. 
Apoyiosi! he yelled, beating his Swand in a similar manner to Ginny. He shot a green beam out of his Swand, hitting a ball. The spell made it fly high in the air, over the shield, and right to where Crabbe and Goyle were. Crabbe and Goyle dropped their wands, and covered their heads. Tci was sending more and more balls over, and Ginny kept making more. They continued flying over the mirror, bombarding Crabbe and Goyle. They were now on the ground, almost crying from the pain the balls were causing them. 
Now there were at least one hundred balls in a neat pile for Tci to launch over to Crabbe and Goyle, so Ginny made her move. She ran around the mirror shield, and over to Crabbe and Goyles forgotten wands. She quickly picked them up, trying to avoid the balls, and Crabbe and Goyle didnt even notice. As soon as she held the wands up in the air, Tci stopped launching balls over, and made the rest of the pile disappear.
Mr. Tci and Miss. Ginny Weasley are the winners! squeaked Professor Flitwick. Excellent teamwork! I dont think Ive ever seen better! 
Crabbe and Goyles red names disappeared from the left box. They walked back to their spot in the circle next to Malfoy. Ginny and Tci smiled at each other, and Tci put his jacked back on. Ginny walked back to her spot, right next to Malfoy. Malfoy pushed Goyle out of the way to make room for her.
Alright everyone, lets get ready for our next match, said Professor Flitwick. He tapped the right cube with his wand again, and a red flash appeared on it. When it receded, a red, 3-1 appeared.
Ah, our first three on one duel! squealed Professor Flitwick. This should be fun! Harry looked around, no one else seemed to think it would be much fun if they got picked as the one to go against three. Everyone was very still and quiet, fidgeting their wands anxiously. Professor Flitwick tapped the left box, three names appeared on the left.
The team of three is Mr. Fred Weasley, Mr. Ron Weasley, and Miss. Hermione Granger! said Professor Flitwick. The three of them breathed a sigh of relief, happy that they werent the one against the three.
And the one is Mr. George Weasley! squeaked Professor Flitwick. All eyes and heads turned to George, and he turned as white as Moaning Myrtle. It took a push from Seamus and Dean to get him into the ring. He nervously walked over to the other side, swallowed hard, and put out his wand. 
Teams ready set go! said Professor Flitwick. 
Nero Poli! said Hermione. A small, blue, liquidy ball shot out of her wand.
Fotia Poli! said Ron. A larger, red, fiery ball came out of his wand.
Electa Poli! said Fred. A yellow, baseball-sized, sharp ball shot out.
The three balls seemed to grow larger in the air, and by the time they were about to hit George, they were the size of basketballs. George had no time to react, he just ducked down, and covered his head. The three balls hit him. The electric one hit his feet, binding them to the floor, the fiery one hit his head, sending his hair into a blaze, and the water one hit him right in the stomach, knocking the wind out of him, and causing him to fall over backwards, dropping his wand. He hair was still on fire when Fred came up, spun around, and plucked the wand out of his brothers hand, waving it on the air.
Well, it appears as though the winner has been declared! said Professor Flitwick as George was twitching on the floor, and Hermione was putting out the fire in his hair. I must say! That has to have been one of the fastest duels Ive ever seen! Ron dragged George back to his place in the circle, and Professor Flitwick made Georges name disappear from the box. 
Good job you two, said Harry to Hermione and Ron when they returned to their spots. Great teamwork. None of those spells wouldve worked as well on its own than all three did together.
That was what we were thinking, said Hermione, grinning. 
Alright everyone, said Professor Flitwick, its time for the next duel! He tapped the boxes again, and a 3-3 appeared; their first three on three match. Harry looked over to the left box, and saw the names that appeared: on one side, Cho Chang, Draco Malfoy, and Justin Finch-Fletchley. One the other: Ernie Macmillan, Dean Thomas, and Seamus Finnigan. 
Would Miss. Chang, Mr. Malfoy, Mr. Finch-Fletchley and Mr. Macmillan, Mr. Thomas, and Mr. Finnigan please get ready for the next duel! said Professor Flitwick excitedly. The six of them eagerly walked to the center of the circle, ready for a good group fight. 
Yeah, go Cho! cheered Harry. Cho smiled at him, and raised her wand, ready to go. Though the teams were fairly evenly matched, the favor was leaning towards her team. Cho and Malfoy had shown their talent at their last duel, so they definitely gave their time better odds.
Ten nine eight sevensixfivefourthreetwoone go! squealed Professor Flitwick. 
Kooverta Maximus! said Cho.
Expelliarmus! yelled Justin. A beam shot out of Justins wand, flying towards Dean Thomas. A shield appeared in front of their team. 
Kooverta! yelled Dean. A small shield appeared in front of him, which would block the Disarming Spell. 
Apoyiosi! yelled Malfoy suddenly. His ray hit the tip of the Disarming Spell, sending it bouncing over Deans shield, and hitting him on the head, causing him to fly backwards, dropping his wand.
One down, two to go, said Malfoy, sneering. Fotia Circo! A line of flames burst from his wand, splitting into two. The two split fire lines circled around Ernie and Seamus, meeting on the other side, forming a circle of flames around them. The flames rose higher, trapping them. 
Nero Poli! yelled Seamus, aiming at the flames. A ball of water shot out, and hit the flames, but they werent affected.
Those are magical flames, Finnigan, laughed Malfoy, water wont work on it. The flames grew larger, closing in on Ernie and Seamus, forcing them closer to the center of the circle. Ernie looked slightly panicked, but Seamus remained cool. He pointed his wand at himself.
Fteros! he yelled. Some small wings popped out of his back. He grabbed Ernie, and flew out of the circle of flames, flying a short distance over to the other side, then soaring higher up.
Get ready Ernie, said Seamus. He pointed his wand at Ernie with one hand, and held him with the other. Kamikazus! Ernie went stiff, and he turned a deep red color all over. Seamus let go of him, and Ernie fell to the floor. 
Get out of the way! yelled Malfoy, pushing Justin and Cho out of the way of falling Ernie. As soon as he hit the ground, he exploded with the force of a giant bomb, causing smoke and fire to pour out. Dust and smoke filled the air for a while, and when it cleared, Harry saw that where Ernie had hit the floor, there was now a giant crater, with his body inside it. Justin was also on the floor, and Cho had collapsed on top of him. They both got hit from the blast. Malfoy, however, was still standing, looking determined.
That was clever! yelled Malfoy to Seamus, who was flying back and forth in the air. Sacrifice one of yours to get two of mine! You have the mind of a businessman, Finnigan! Seamus smirked.
Expelliarmus! he yelled from up at the ceiling. Since the spell took a while to travel from where he was to Malfoy, he easily dodged it.
Hereuius! yelled Malfoy. His spell was quick, hitting Seamus in less than a second. When the spell hit Seamus, he started shaking all over. Harry though he was having a seizure at first, but then, he saw that Seamus was laughing. But, he wasnt just laughing, he was exploding with painful joy. He was holding his sides took keep them from splitting as he was laughing so much, he started drooling.
Seamus forgot to stay in the air, and fell to the ground, rolling with laughter. Malfoy walked up to him, and took the wand out of his hand. Seamus didnt even try to hold on to his wand, he was too busy holding himself. 
You can end your laughing fit now, said Malfoy, tapping Seamus with his wand. He suddenly stopped laughing, and glared at Malfoy who was smiling. 
Mr. Malfoy, Miss. Chang, and Mr. Finch-Fletchley are the winners! said Professor Flitwick, bouncing out of his chair with excitement. Malfoy spun his wand around like a cowboy would a gun, and blew on it, laughing with Crabbe and Goyle. By now, Cho, Justin, Ernie, and Dean had recovered from the spells, and were up, walking back to their spots in the circle, ready to see the next duel.
That was an excellent demonstration of some very good spells! said Professor Flitwick. Using the Launching Charm to make the spell bounce over the shield, that was quick thinking Mr. Malfoy. Utilizing the Kamikaze Spell, Mr. Finnigan, while highly dangerous, was ingenious. Also, the Tickling Charm, one of my personal favorites, was also a nice touch Mr. Malfoy. 
Malfoy smirked, he was enjoying the praise that Professor Flitwick was giving him. Even though he was evil, he wasnt stupid. He knew how to think, and Harry had to be careful dueling him, he was an extremely formidable opponent. 
Professor Flitwick tapped the right box again, preparing for the next duel. The box flashed red, and a 1-2 appeared. He tapped the left one, and everyones eyes darted towards it as the names appeared. Professor Flitwick read them off,
The duel will be Mr. Aylar Dumbledore with Mr. Neville Longbottom against Mr. Harry Potter!
Harry felt all eyes go towards him, the dueling champion. He, however, was not feeling confident at all. He would have to go against Aylar, the greatest student wizard hed ever seen! Aylar, however, wasnt looking to excited about the match either. He eyed Neville as if he were some hideous blob, and resented the fact that he was teamed up with him. He rolled his eyes as he walked to one side of the ring. Neville tripped on Aylars feet, causing Aylar to sigh as he picked him up.
Youll do fine, said Ron, patting him on the back as Harry walked to the side of the ring opposite of Aylar and Neville. Neville will hurt him more than hell help him! Harry grinned, butterflies throwing up in his stomach. He brandished his wand, staring at his opponents, trying to look assured.
On your marks get set go! screamed Professor Flitwick, jumping out of his chair with excitement. 
Poli Omihi! yelled Aylar, sending a heavy cloud of foam right at Harrys face. It exploded right in front of him, causing his glasses to become clouded and foggy, and to fall back a few steps. 
Maherius! yelled Harry, frantically waving his wand with one hand, trying to aim towards Aylar and Neville, wiping his face with his other. He heard Neville cry with pain and yell something as Harry wiped the last few suds from his face. When he got his vision back, he saw Aylar lying on the floor, and Neville holding two wands, yelling, Im sorry!
Harry didnt have time to think of what had happened. 
Megola Heri! yelled Harry. A giant hand shot out of his wand, with a faint, gassy tail behind it. It floated over to Neville, and slapped him on the head, causing him to fall on the ground, along with the two wands he was holding. Aylar quickly got back to his senses, and grabbed his wand. He tried going for Nevilles, but Harry was quicker,
Accio wand! he yelled. The wand flew right into Harrys hand, and he put it into his pocket. Aylar sprung to his feet, and started circling the ring of people. 
Hand! yelled Harry. The giant hand he conjured flew over to him, and Harry jumped on top of it. He soared high into the air, leaving Aylar stranded on the ground. 
Porcini Magus! came Aylars tiny voice from below. A pinkish beam flew up to Harry, and hit him on the forehead. Harry felt his body become very warm, and saw his skin turn pink. He felt his fingers start to melt together, and become hard and black. It suddenly daunted on him what was happening to him: he was turning into a pig!
Anthropi Magus! yelled Harry, pointing the wand at himself. It was the counter curse for the transformation spell. Harrys spell hit his face, but it was too late for the rest of his body. His torso was now perfectly round and pink, and his legs and arms were no more than large hams with hooves at the end. He looked extremely odd, the body of a pig with the head of a human. 
Harry tried to grip his wand, but he realized that he didnt have fingers anymore. He looked down at his hand and saw that his fingers had fused around the wand he was holding, and now his wand was impaled through his hoof. Even though it was going through him, rather than him holding onto it, Harry could still use it. He pointed it at Aylar, from up in the air.
Siragus! yelled Harry. No beam shot out of his wand, but there was an explosion right next to Aylar, and a giant hole appeared. 
Siragus! yelled Harry again, and again, still aiming for Aylar. Each time, however, Aylar jumped out of the way. They had completed a full circle now, and Aylar was right Next to Neville.
Siragus! yelled Harry one last time. The explosion hit Neville as Aylar bounced out of the way. However, Neville flew up from the force of the explosion just as Aylar was jumping over him. Neville crashed into Aylar, sending both of them to the ground, and their wands flying.
Accio! said Harry. The wands flew right at him, and, having no hands, he caught them in his mouth. Harry directed the giant hand back down to the ground where Professor Flitwick was fixing the holes in the ground, and tending to Neville and Aylar.
Congratulations Harry, said Professor Flitwick. Only next time, try not to destroy the entire room to win.
Sorry, professor, said Harry, grinning, still having the body of a pig. When Aylar and Neville had woken up, Professor Flitwick turned to Harry, and transformed his body back. Neville stood up, and started apologizing to Aylar, for his mistakes. Aylar, however, paid him no attention as he walked back to his spot in the circle, arms folded. 
If it hadnt been for that idiot, said Aylar to himself, indicating Neville, I wouldve easily won. First he hit me with his own spell, then he hit me with his body. Arg, the fool.
Aylars and Nevilles names disappeared from the box as Harry was welcomed back to his spot by Ron and Hermione. Professor Flitwick had just finished raising the ground that Harry had blown away, and was floating back to his chair. He tapped the boxes again, and everyone watched, to see what appeared. 
After a few seconds, a small 3-2 appeared, causing the next box to show its names. The first two names that came up were,
Miss. Ginny Weasley, and Mr. Justin Finch-Fletchley! announced Professor Flitwick. They both entered the circle. And on the other team Mr. Tci Mr. Draco Malfoy and Mr. Harry Potter!
Amid the cheering of people, eager to see the next duel, Harrys mind was racing. He would have to compete with Malfoy on his team? His greatest enemy was supposed to be his ally?
It took a shove from an angry looking Ron to get Harry out of his dazed state, and with the rest of his team. He walked slowly and sadly over to Tci and Malfoy, who were discussing tactics. Harry, however, was still tired from his last duel. 
Alright Harry, said Tci. Okay, weve got a pretty good plan right now-
Yeah, so dont screw it up, Potter, grinned Malfoy. Harry shot him a look that shut him up.
Anyway, what were going to do is go for Justin first. Even though Ginnys better, losing her ally will hurt her more than actually hitting her. Shes easily weakened by the feeling of loneliness. All we have to do is take out Justin, and the duel is in the bag.
And how are we going to do that? asked Malfoy.
Well, I propose a group effort. Malfoy, you distract Ginny by-
No way, said Malfoy, looking quite serious. Theres no way Im even going to think about hurting Ginny! Tci and Harry stared at him.
Okay then Malfoy, said Tci, Ill distract Ginny, and you two worry about Justin. Harry, if you could blast a hole, and then Malfoy, if you cover it, well be good.
Alright, said Harry.
Whatever, said Malfoy, standing up from the huddle. 
Harry looked around, from the sight of it, everyone looked as though they were ready to duel, including Ginny and Justin. Tci got into his usual fighting stance, and Professor Flitwick began his countdown.
Eenie meenie miney go! he yelled.
Expelliarmus! yelled Ginny, aiming for Harry. Harry quickly ducked out of the way, and rolled over to the side, getting closer to Justin, ready to put him into a hole. 
Ballano! yelled Tci. A massive, gray ball popped out of his wand, and started rolling towards Ginny, easily distracting her from Malfoy and Harry. Malfoy was already next to Justin, opposite of Harry.
Siragus! yelled Harry, aiming for Justins feet. Just as he was about to react, a giant hole appeared beneath his feet, and smoke started pouring out of it. He fell right inside of it. Malfoy then walked up to the hole.
Sendoni Asimi! he yelled. A thin, silvery sheet flew out of his wand like a fountain. It quickly covered the hole, leaving no escape for Justin. He tried to jump and fly out of the hole, but the sheet pushed him back down. He was trapped. If Harry hadnt hated Malfoy to the core, he wouldve given him a high-five. 
Harry looked over, and saw Ginny, still being chased by Tci with the massive, metal ball. However, once she looked over, and saw that her comrade was trapped in a hole, she stopped dead in her tracks. She just stared, looking frightened, surprised, and sad at the same time allowing the ball to hit her. The force of the collision sent her flying forward, and landing on her face. Tci ran over, and merely picked up the wand from out of her hand. 
The match is over! squealed Professor Flitwick. Mr. Malfoy, Mr. Tci, and Mr. Potter win! Tci put his jacket back on, and Malfoy took a bow, laughing as he walked back to his spot in the circle. Professor Flitwick sighed as he got rid of the silver sheet, and pulled Justin out.
Come now Mr. Finch-Fletchley, said Professor Flitwick. A simple Maxilari Spell wouldve gotten rid of the sheet, you should know that. Justin nodded groggily, and rubbed his head. He had hit it against the hard sheet so much, it must have really hurt. Justin helped Ginny up, and she walked back to her spot next to Malfoy. She didnt look too disappointed about her defeat, in fact, she was laughing about it with Malfoy.
Another excellent example of teamwork, said Professor Flitwick. Even though it was a fairly quick match, I congratulate you three on your brief camaraderie. Harry and Malfoy glared at each other, and Malfoy stuck out his tongue. They had no camaraderie. The only reason they worked together was because Tci told them to.
Our next match is about to begin, said Professor Flitwick, drumming the boxes with his wand. A 2-3 appeared. On the other box, the five names appeared: Fred Weasley, Ron Weasley, and Hermione Granger grouped together on one side, and Tci and Cho Chang grouped together on the other. Harry gave Ron and Hermione thumbs-up as they walked out to the dueling ring, joining Fred., looking very nervous since they had to battle Tci.
Red light yellow light green light go! yelled Professor Flitwick. 
Expelliarmus! yelled Cho. 
Tri Oplo! yelled Tci. 
The three orbs shot out of Tcis Swand first, hitting Fred, Ron, and Hermione simultaneously, and knocking them over, causing Fred to be unable to dodge Chos Disarming Spell. It was a direct hit, and his wand flew out of his hand, and right into Chos pocket. 
Once down, two to go, said Cho, winking at Harry. He waved weakly back, feeling extremely torn inside. Should he root for his friends, or his girlfriend?
Ekathormirio Oplo! yelled Hermione, looking fierce, pointing her wand directly at Tci and Cho. Evidently, in the excitement of the match, she had forgotten her logical moves. Her wand started to shake a little, then there was a small explosion at the tip as thousands upon thousands of small balls shot out of it, flying right towards Cho and Tci. 
Fotia Porta! yelled Tci, not loosing his cool. A large, spinning disc shot out of his wand, and flames grew around the edges of it. There was a red swirling in the center, it looked stunningly like a portal, and indeed it was. The balls that were flying towards him and Cho instead hit the fiery portal, and were sucked inside, transporting them somewhere else. It wasnt long before all the balls were gone, and the portal collapsed on itself with a loud crack. 
Hermione and Ron were so distracted by Tci and the portal, that they didnt notice Cho sneaking up behind them. 
Sovrako Pano! she yelled, surprising them. Immediately, Hermione and Ron bent over, as if pushed over by some invisible force, and the most humiliating moment of their lives began. Their underpants came flying up, held by another invisible force, giving them an extreme pain in their backside. Their underwear kept getting pulled higher and higher, but they still remained on the floor, bent over. Ron and Hermiones faces were a dark red, and they both had tears in their eyes from the embarrassment and the pain. Soon, it became too much. They both dropped their wands. 
There was a loud ripping noise, and the invisible force let go, but not before Cho picked up their wands, holding them high in the air. Hermione didnt stick around, she left the Great Hall, crying the entire way out. Ron, however, stayed, but jumped back to his spot in the circle. Everyone was still laughing when Fred was awakened by Professor Flitwick. 
That girlfriend of yours, Harry, said Ron, rubbing his backside, shes bad news. That Wedgie Spell is lethal!
Oh Ron, said Harry, come on. It was just a little spell.
Yeah, but there were a million other spells she couldve used. Why did it have to be the one that would embarrass us the most? Harry shrugged.
I dont know, he said. Ill talk to her afterwards. I just hope she doesnt use it on me! Ron glared at him.
Whos ready for the next round? said Professor Flitwick, highly excited. Everyone cheered, this could be their last round if four people were in it all that were left were Harry, Tci, Cho, and Malfoy. 
Professor Flitwick tapped the boxes for possibly the last time, and everyone looked as the number appeared; it was another 1-3.
Harry swallowed hard, what if he was the one against the other three? What if he had to fight against Cho?
Professor Flitwick tapped the other box nervously, as if he almost didnt want to see who was going to be slaughtered. Then, four names appeared on the box, and he read them off.
The teams are Mr. Tci, Mr. Malfoy and Miss. Chang against Mr. Potter.
Harry was shocked beyond belief. He had to go against three very good people, one of which he had a relationship with. What was he going to do?
Youre going to do your best, said Ron, as if he head heard what Harry had thought. He was still rubbing his behind when he pushed Harry into the ring. 
Harry, however, didnt need the push. He walked with his head held high into the circle, feeling an odd and sudden burst of courage. He faced his three opponents, Tci in his usual pose, Malfoy looking as if Christmas had come early, and Cho looking almost terrified. Harry brandished his wand, ready for a surprise and great opening attack.
Ein zwei drei go! squealed Professor Flitwick. Even though he felt sorry for Harry, he was still excited to witness another good match.
Thalasa Maximus! yelled Harry. Not a small fountain, but an enormous waterfall of liquid exploded forth from his wand, flowing all over the room, flooding it to several feet high within seconds. The only piece of land left was the small, artificial floor under Harry that the spell had produced, and a larger rectangular base that Professor Flitwick had quickly conjured for him and the rest of the duelers to get on.
Harrys opening move did take Malfoy, Cho, and Tci by surprise. Not only had they not expected it, and were not prepared for it at all: all three of them were now deep underwater. It was time for Harrys next move.
Electa Maximus! he yelled, pointing at the ocean he had created. A bolt of lightning shot out from the tip of his wand, and hit the water, spreading all over, including where Tci, Cho, and Malfoy were. The electricity flowed through the water, and right to them, shocking them all or at least Harry thought it did. Suddenly, Tci and Malfoy jumped out of the water, holding Cho, who looked unconscious. Tci and Malfoy, however, looked as though they had not been affected by the electricity.
Fucillius! yelled Tci, aiming right at Harry. He didnt have time to react. The spell hit him with the force, and pain, of a bullet right in the chest. Harry curled over with the pain, it was excruciating, feeling the cold metal inside his warm body, pushing against his quickly beating organs.
Harry pulled down his cloak slightly, to see how badly he was bleeding, when he saw that he wasnt at all. There was no sign of bleeding, or any puncture at all. Tci had just given Harry some imaginary pain, like the Maherius Curse. 
Knowing this, Harry quickly shoved the painful thoughts out of his mind, pulled his cloak back up, and jumped up onto his feet, seeing Malfoy and Tcis surprised faces. 
Expelliarmus! Harry yelled, aiming for Tci. The beam shot right at him, but he ducked just in time to avoid it. 
Anemos! yelled Malfoy, aiming at the water in front of Harry. A string wind blew out from his wand, and hit the water, forcing a wave to appear. Tci was holding th wave in place, right in front of Harry, as Malfoy fed it more and more water by blowing air. The height of the wave quickly reached the ceiling, and Tci stopped holding it up. It came collapsing down on itself, right onto Harry. 
Harry quickly transformed his back into his wings, and flew off to the side as fast as he could, avoiding the wave. It hit his small island, sending it underwater, underneath a new island of sea foam.
Locomotor Mortis! yelled Harry from up near the ceiling, aiming right at Tci. The beam shot out of his wand too fast for Tci to react, and it hit him, making his legs freeze like a rock. Seeing the opportunity, Harry flew over, closer to Tci.
Expelliarmus! he yelled, aiming at Tcis frozen legs. The spell hit him, as expected, and sent his wand right into Harrys hand. He then shot over to Cho, who was right next to Tci, and picked her wand up too. 
Ohi Ptisi! yelled Malfoy. Harry recognized the spell as the counter spell for the Wings Charm. His spell hit Harrys back, but it did nothing. Unless Harry wanted it to be revealed that he was Animagus, the wings had to go.
Harry gave in, and transformed his wings into his normal back while still in the air. He fell down from the ceiling, splashing into the water. 
Aftokinito Pisco! yelled Harry, treading water. A massive fish popped right out of his wand. It was a magnificent fish, glowing all the colors of the rainbow, with large silvery eyes. Harry jumped onto its back, and pointed his wand towards Malfoy, who was hovering slightly above the water, next to the disarmed Tci, and unconscious Cho.
So, Potter, said Malfoy mockingly, once again, its come down to us.
Exactly like before, said Harry. Malfoy sneered.
Not exactly, Potter. There will be one difference this time I will win.
Dont count on it.
Fotia Poli! yelled Malfoy. A beam of fire shot out from his wand. Harry ducked out of the way by turning his fish, and the fire hit the water. Surprisingly, though, the water did not put the fire out, it suddenly burst into flames, and began spreading all over the giant sea. Malfoy was laughing.
How did you do that? asked Harry.
Potter, you have to stop thinking about reality when dealing with magic. Its not a rock-paper-scissors game of fire, water and electricity in magic, of one being able to defeat one other, wile being weakened by another. No, in magic, it is a caste system: with fire at the top. Anything is flammable.
The sea of water was now a hellish inferno. There was not a drop of water anywhere, and Harrys fish that he was riding on was now a pile of ash. The platforms that Professor Flitwick, Tci, Cho, and the other students were now floating high above the flames, leaving Malfoy and Harry close to the ground, being burned. The smoke and heat were become overwhelming.
Aqua Nero, gasped Harry. A thin cloud popped out of his wand but, instead of it floating over to Malfoy, it stayed on top of Harry, raining down on him, and putting out some of the flames around him. Harry looked up, and saw that Malfoy had done the same thing. 
Stupefy! yelled Malfoy.
Bakatcha! yelled Harry. The small mirror popped up in front of him just as the beam was about to hit his face. The spell hit the mirror, and bounced back at Malfoy, taking him by surprise, and hitting him. He collapsed onto the ground. 
Harry ran up to him, ready to pluck the wand right out of his hand. He pointed his wands tip at Malfoys, ready to perform the Summoning Charm.
Siragus! yelled Malfoy suddenly, jumping up, and scaring Harry. The force of the Explosion Spell being used directly on him was overpowering. He felt a massive spherical force, greater than anything he couldve ever believed possible, push him backwards, upwards, down, left and right all at the same time. He felt like he was being torn apart from the inside out. He felt smoke pouring out of him from all directions, heating his skin to unbearable temperatures. Harry collapsed onto the ground, breathing hard. His cloud was gone, and the heat from the fire all around him was affecting him again. 
He heard Malfoy walking up to him, prepared to finish him off, take his wand, and declare himself greater than Harry Potter. He would smile, and everyone would cheer for him, thinking him to be the greatest dueler. Harry couldnt allow that.
Oplo! yelled Harry, jumping up to his feet. It was a direct hit right in the stomach. Malfoy stumbled backwards, and lost his breath. Harry raised his wand, feeling dizzy from the smoke, ready to perform another Orb Spell, when Malfoy took out his wand, and muttered something. Something large and green appeared, so large, it almost touched the top of the ceiling.
Harry stumbled backwards, and fell down, looking up at what Malfoy had summoned. He looked up with glazed and foggy eyes, on the verge of collapse. His head was hurting with the smoke clogging his brain and a sharp pain all over his forehead. Harry looked up, and saw what Malfoy had conjured, and he fainted.

Chapter 24- The Quidditch Final
Harry sat up, and brandished his wand at Malfoy again. Even though the room was foggy and smoky from the fire, he could make out Malfoy perfectly, just standing there, thinking hed won. 
Expelliarmus! yelled Harry, as loud as he could, which was only about a whisper. The thin beam shot towards Malfoy, very slowly; Harry could see it growing every second. He waited for what felt like an eternity for the beam to finally hit Malfoy. The spell hit him, but it did nothing. He just stood there, glowing, laughing at Harry.
What was going on? His laughter was getting louder and louder. It was an earsplitting noise that forced Harry to cover his ears. His face was splitting open with pain. Harry let out a single scream.
And woke up. He was in a bed in the Hospital Wing. Sweat was pouring down his head like a faucet, and he was barely clothed.
What was going on? Harry tried to remember what had happened: he was dueling Malfoy, and then something happened but did he just dream that? Suddenly, the curtain around him was thrown open by Madam Pomfrey.
You have some visitors, she said. You should be fully recovered soon, so I let them in. She walked out of the way, and Ron, Hermione, Cho, and Ginny appeared. Harry, embarrassed at having nothing more than his boxers on, pulled his covers up to his chin.
Wha- um well- yeah so um. Hello. stuttered Harry. Cho threw her arms around him, causing him to blush slightly.
Oh thank goodness youre okay, Harry, she said. 
Why, what happened? asked Harry. His brain was still feeling fuzzy.
Thats what were trying to figure out, said Ron.
What? You mean, you dont know? asked Harry. All four of them shook their heads.
All we know is that youve been unconscious for an entire day, said Hermione.
The rest of its still a mystery, said Ginny.
Well, what do you know? asked Harry.
Well Malfoy used some kind of spell that produced a large beast. No one really got a good look at it since as soon as you fainted, he made it disappear. Once it was gone, we found you on the floor, unconscious. The smoke from the fire probably got to you.
Either that or the spell Malfoy used, said Ron.
Or from the shock of seeing what he conjured, said Cho. 
What spell did he use? asked Harry. 
I we dont know, said Hermione. This came as a shock to Harry. If anyone would know what spell Malfoy had used, it would have been her. Ive never seen anything like it before. 
So said Harry slowly, Malfoy beat me he won the duel. Everyone except for Ginny sighed. She put her hands on her sides.
Really now, she said, cant you just be happy for Draco?
Ginny, said Ron flatly, nobody here will ever feel happy for Malfoy, and no one here knows why you do.
Oh you guys, said Ginny arrogantly, you just dont know the true Draco. What you see is some twisted version of him, molded by his father. Whenever hes not thinking about his dad, or his plans, hes really sweet. Harry, Ron, and Hermione shuddered at the thought of a sweet Malfoy. 
Well, I just wish I couldve beaten that sweet Malfoy, said Harry.
Dont worry, said Hermione, youll get your chance again.
What do you mean? 
Remember? The day after the Quidditch final, the day before the O.W.L.s, were going to have another duel, at breakfast, for the entire school to watch. You can get him back then.
Great, sighed Harry, I couldnt even beat him today. How could I possibly even fare against him the day after the Quidditch Final, and the day before the biggest test of my life?
Harry was let out of the hospital with his friends, he had apparently gotten over whatever had caused him to faint, and there was no point in holding him any longer. Instead of enjoying the rest of the day off, though, Harry collapsed into his bed, and fell asleep. The next day, though, he didnt get much of a break. He had Animagus lessons in the morning with Ron and Hermione. The lessons, however, were more fun than they usually were. Professor McGonagall seemed to be in a good mood about something, and instead of staying inside her small office for their lesson, they went outside, far into the grounds and had their lesson there. 
For the first time, Harry flew through the open air as a gryffin. It was a wonderful experience, even better than flying with just the wings. The gryffins body was surprisingly more aerodynamic than a humans, so Harry could shoot through the air at fantastic speeds, leaving birds miles behind him.
After several hours of flying around, and getting used to staying as a gryffin, Harry flew back down to Professor McGonagall, where Ron and Hermione were; Ron as the chameleon, and Hermione as the unicorn. Professor McGonagall clapped her hands together, and smiled. 
Im very proud to announce, she said happily, that you three are now almost official Animagi.
Almost official? asked Hermione, morphing from her wonderfully beautiful unicorn body into her human form.
Yes, said Professor McGonagall, I can clearly see that you are all perfectly able to transform quickly and efficiently, and hold your transformations for as long as you would like. The only step left is to register you three.
And when will we be registered? asked Ron, swiftly popping out of his tiny chameleon form.
You will all be registered as Animagi on May 28th, it is the one day I have off for quite a while. Until then, I urge you not to show off your abilities to anyone. Alright? The three of them nodded their heads.
Professor said Harry.
Yes, Potter?
Is Malfoy going to be an official Animagus too? As soon as these words left his mouth, Professor McGonagall made a rare expression: she smiled. 
More or less, she said, still smiling. While hell be registered, it wont be as an Animagus, but a Polymagus. Harry sighed.
Are we ever going to see what he can become?
Oh youll see soon enough, Potter, she said. What was she talking about? Was Malfoy planning to surprise him at night or something? No, Professor McGonagall wouldve told him if it was something like that. It wasnt like her to act like this.
Before Harry could ask any more follow-up questions, he felt himself being dragged away by Ron and Hermione, all the way back up to the castle. 
Come on Harry, grumbled Hermione, weve got to study for the O.W.L.s, and I dont want to get anything less than a perfect, especially because of you. Harry got up, and walked back to the castle, discussing possibilities for what Malfoys animal could be.
Well, Ive read a few things on Polymagi- said Hermione when they arrived in the library.
She had to have read something on it, whispered Ron, shes read every book in this entire library.
-and Ive found out that what most of them or at least three out of all five of them have not transformed into several different animals, but combined several animals together, to make one superior one.
So Malfoy definitely has the advantage said Harry. If Malfoy had put together some of the nastiest creatures on Earth, there may be no stopping him, especially if he worked for Voldemort, which he was almost certainly doing already. 
They studied for the rest of the day, just sitting there, reading books. It was very dull work, and Harry was glad when it came time to go to bed, though the next several days werent any more entertaining. All his classes were still review. However, Hagrid told them what his Advance O.W.L. requirement would be.
Well, yall ar gonna fight yer dragons gainst on an other. The final four leftll get th Advanced O.W.L. It seemed simple enough, it was like a duel. Each dragon would fight another randomly chosen one, and the last four standing gave their owners the Advanced O.W.L.
To get ready for this challenge, Hagrid decided to devote the rest of the year to training the dragons how to fight well. They used their books to figure out how to toughen up their dragons, and found out that flying was the best exercise for them. So, each student hopped up onto their dragon, and attempted to make it fly. It would have been a very strange sight for anyone, seeing almost twenty students trying to mount dragons, and poorly fly them through the sky, wobbling all over. 
Harrys massive Hungarian Horntail (now fully grown, and the size of ten of Hagrids huts) proved to be very obedient. At just the slightest command of him waving his wand, the dragon would immediately turn to wherever Harry wanted. 
Other students were not as lucky. Hermiones Three-Headed Transylvanian Terror was living up to its name. It was the size of two school buses, but did not move like them. No matter how much Hermione pointed, the dragon would not move an inch. All it did was throw her off its back.
Ron was doing quite well. His dragon, like Harrys, obeyed his every command, going wherever he wanted it to go, even thought its top speed seemed to be less than one mile an hour. The African Abysmall was getting larger every day, and not vertically.
It was Malfoy, though, he seemed to be the best at flying his dragon. He didnt even use his wand, he just leaned over to the side, and his dragon moved along with him. He and the dragon seemed to have some sort of bond, a connection that no one else, not even Harry, could surpass. 
The weeks, soon turning into months, passed on like that. Winter was far in the past, and Spring was just ending. It was mid may, and just about time for the fifth years to take their O.W.L.s, and the seventh years to take their finals, the dreaded N.E.W.T.s. Harry was amazed at how fast the year seemed to go by, and how little dark activity was going on. Harry tried to amuse himself with thinking that Voldemort was taking a vacation. But, the second he thought about that, he remembered how evil and twisted Voldemort was, and knowing him, he was planning something horrid.
Harry, however, apart from the other students, had something else to think about that wasnt involved with the O.W.L.s, the Quidditch final, or anything that had to do with school at all his moms birthday was coming up, May 30th, the day he was going to revive her. That was what got Harry through this immensely stressful time, the thought of him being reunited with his mother, for the rest of his life.
The last week of school finally arrived, and Harry was psyched up.
First up the Quidditch final us against Slytherin yet again, he said to himself, marking off on his calendar, before he went to bed, after an exhausting, final Quidditch practice. He had four big things to do in a row, and tomorrow kicked it off. Harry collapsed onto his bed, and groaned. He felt something he had not even thought about for quite a while another note. 
Harry reached under his pillow, and grabbed the small piece of wrinkled parchment. This time, however, the note was written very nice and neatly, in dark red ink.
Harry Potter, prepare to scream,
For this note is not a dream.
I know what you did, and will never forget,
Confess to me, or you shall dearly pay, Ill bet.
You will never escape my undying wrath,
If you succeed, prepare to take a bloody bath.
Harry crumpled up the note, yet again. He had gotten several of these notes all year long, and not one time had the person who had seen him take Fawkes acted out on any of their threats, and this one was going to be no different. He threw the crumpled parchment into the trash, and fell asleep.
Captains, shake hands, said Madam Hooch. The Quidditch final was about to begin, and this was the first step towards its beginning. Harry walked towards the center of the Quidditch field, amid the cheers of his fellow Gryffindors, and his teammates. He grabbed Marcus Flints massive hand, and shook it up and down. 
As Harry was shaking Flints hand, two thoughts went through his head:
I shouldve had breakfast, and, We cant lose, were undefeated But then, he thought, Slytherin had only lost one match, they were still pretty good. But who did they lose that match to? 
Us, Harry reminded himself out loud.
Were gonna crush you, said Flint, letting go of Harrys hand and smiling.
The rest of the Slytherin team walked up next to him, and mounted their brooms. Though Flint was right in front of him, the only opponent Harry could see was Malfoy, and his egotistical smirk. Harry wondered what kind of animal was living behind that face of his.
Madam Hooch threw the Snitch into the air, followed by the two Bludgers. She grabbed the Quaffle, and lee Jordans voice rang out.
Three two one go! he yelled. Madam Hooch threw the Quaffle into the air, and the game began.
All the players immediately became a blur as they shot off in every direction. Ron flew towards the Gryffindor goals, and the Slytherin Keeper flew towards his goals just as fast. Harry let Alicia, Angelina, and Katie work their Quaffle magic as he soared out of the way, flying about the perimeter of the field, searching for any sign of the golden Snitch. 
And this is the Quidditch final on this lovely summer day, just two days before the O.W.L.s and the N.E.W.T.s, rang Lee Jordans voice. And what a game it is so far! Gryffindor is in possession of the Quaffle- no Slytherin- no Gryffindor! Wow, look at those Chasers go!
Ready to lose again, Potter? came Malfoys voice from across the field. Though it was hard to hear him over the cheering and announcing, Harry understood him perfectly. 
Youd better get ready to lose, Malfoy, said Harry, turning sharply to avoid a Bludger. Youre going to lose today, and tomorrows duel. Malfoy sneered.
My magic took you out before, and it will do it again, he smirked before he shot off. So it was one of his spells that caused Harry to faint. Harry started going over in his head what Malfoy could have done, when Lee Jordan shouted,
Gryffindor scores! Ten to nothing! The Gryffindor stands erupted in cheers as the Quaffle quickly found its way back into the playing field, and into the game. Harry continued searching the field, looking for any sign of the Snitch. Then, he saw it. A tiny, sharp, hint of gold, right in the middle of the field. It was just hovering there unaware that it was going to be caught.
Harry leaned into his broom, and put his feet back, blasting towards the Snitch, becoming a blur. He was about fifty feet away from catching it when Malfoy saw him. He flew towards the Snitch too, just as fast as Harry.
It was soon discovered that they were on a collision course, and a very painful one at that. Harry saw Malfoy flying right towards him, on the opposite side of the field. It was a game of chicken, only on broomsticks, and whoever turned away would lose the game for the team. If Harry turned away, he would save himself a lot of pain, but it would leave the Snitch easily accessible to Malfoy. Harry continued flying, giving a sudden and quick burst of speed.
Malfoy seemed to be thinking the same way as Harry, he didnt look any more willing to give in. He just kept flying towards the Snitch, faster and faster. Harry was now just twenty feet away from the Snitch (Malfoys going to move any second now), fifteen feet (come on, move!), ten feet (oh no, are we going to hit?), five feet (should I swerve?). He was close enough to see the whites of Malfoys eyes, when a Bludger came between them both, hitting the stationary Snitch, sending it flying all the way across the field. Fred Weasley zoomed between them as well, chasing the Bludger, giving a quick apology to Harry as he flew by. Harry and Malfoy skidded to a sudden stop, almost touching. Malfoy spat at Harry, and then he shot off. The Snitch wouldnt be visible for a while, it wasnt worth it to chase it now.
Harry went back to scouting the field. He flew higher up, so the entire arena would be visible. He kept an eye out for any sign of the Snitch, and when he looked over at the Gryffindor goals, he saw that Slytherin had scored.
Ten to ten, said Lee Jordan, not quite as enthusiastically as when Gryffindor had scored. The Slytherin crowd, however, erupted into applause and cheers. Harry even saw Tci, the Gryffindor wannabe, join in on some of the cheering this time. 
The Slytherin chasers were evidently doing well; Gryffindor usually had over fifty points by now. Harry had to try and get the Snitch as soon as possible. Gryffindor wasnt going to get up in the hundreds anytime soon, so if Malfoy got it, theyd definitely lose.
Harry glanced over the field even harder, looking for anything even slightly golden. He got caught off guard a few times by thinking some of the golden Gryffindor flags were the Snitch, but other than that, Harry couldnt see anything.
Slytherin scores again, said Lee, Twenty to ten.
Harry needed to find that Snitch. Just then, he had a thought: hed improve his odds if he had more eyes. He few over to the Gryffindor goal posts where Ron was busy flying back and forth. 
Hey Harry, he groaned, sorry I let those last two get passed me, I-
Its okay, Ron, said Harry. Theyre just really good. I doubt even Oliver couldve stopped them from scoring. Ron grinned.
What do you want?
I need you to help me look for the Snitch, said Harry.
But, if I help you look for it, who will guard the goals?
We can sacrifice a few points for a whopping one-hundred-fifty, said Harry. Ron nodded, and flew a little away from his posts, scanning the area. Ron took one half of the stadium, and Harry took the other. They both got to concentrate harder on a smaller area, increasing their chances. 
However, that bonus came with a price: the Slytherin chasers easily scored a goal on Gryffindor, Ron didnt even attempt to try and stop them.
Thirty to ten, Slytherin, said Lee. Whats going on Gryffindor? Lets play this game! Come on!
Whats the matter Potter? said Malfoy, laughing, seeing both Ron and Harry looking around. Need some help finding the Snitch? Ha, well, dont count on Weasley here to help you, the only thing thats smaller than his IQ is his parents bank account! He flew away, laughing to himself.
Right over there, said Ron, gritting his teeth, trying not to let Malfoys comment get to him. I see it. He pointed towards the stands where Lee was. It was below his podium, so Lee was unable to see it, but Harry could see it perfectly. He patted Ron on the shoulder as he shot over to it, and Slytherin scored another goal.
Forty to ten, Slytherin! What are you doing Gryffindor? I dont think youve showed up yet- ahh! he yelled as he saw Harry flying right towards him. 
Faster and faster Harry flew, emotions running through him, he had to get it, he had to get it. He was only four feet away from it, he reached out his hand, ready to grab it, when suddenly, Malfoy crashed right into him. 
He hit him like a tennis ball would hit a brick wall, Harry bounced right off. Malfoy hovered there, laughing, just feet away from the Snitch, while Harry tumbled in all directions in the air, holding onto his broom for dear life. The broom shook and wobbled from the impact force, and Harry fell off. 
He reached up just in time to grab onto the very end of the bristles. The broom was holding him up, but it took a lot of strength to hold on. Harrys fingers started to hurt from holding on so hard to something so small. He looked up, and saw that Malfoy was still laughing, and that the Snitch was still next to him, ready to be plucked.
Malfoy then seemed to gain control of himself, and turned towards the Snitch. 
So much for me losing, eh Potter? he snarled, as he moved in to get it. Harry gritted his teeth, he hated Malfoy. Just then, a miracle happened. A Bludger came out of nowhere, and hit Malfoy right in the back of the head. Harry saw Malfoys eyes bulge and spit and blood fly out of his mouth from the force of the impact. He fell of his broom as well, but did not manage to grab a hold of anything like Harry did, he just fell twenty feet, right onto the sandy ground.
Harry looked up, and saw that the Snitch was still there. But, it was too late. He couldnt hold on any longer. Harry lost his grip on the bristles, and fell. 
As he was falling, though, a thought came to Harry. He didnt need a broom to fly he had wings, he could transform! But, he didnt have a wand with him, so he couldnt make it look like he had used the Flight Charm. It was either reveal to everyone that he was an Animagus, or lose the Quidditch final. 
Well, Harry quickly thought to himself, tomorrow everyone will find out when Professor McGonagall registers me. Harry chose to transform.
Just when he was a few feet above the ground, Harry shot the wings out of his back. He stopped where he was in the air, hovered for a second, ruffled his wings, then flew directly upwards, right towards the Snitch.
As Harry flew, he noticed that it was perfectly quiet. No one in the entire audience, or on the field was making a sound, not even Lee Jordan. All eyes were upon him, the Animagus boy. Harry felt slightly self-conscious, but kept on flying. He only stopped when he felt the cold metal of the Snitch inside his fingers. 
The crowd erupted into an ear shattering applause. Everyone (except for the Slytherins) was cheering ecstatically. Gryffindor had won the Quidditch cup, one-hundred-sixty to forty. As Harry looked around the stadium, still flapping his wings, and hovering in the air, a new feeling came over him. It wasnt a good feeling though it was actually quite painful and getting more painful by the second. 
It felt as though his hand were covered in flaming bees, and they were all stinging him at once, burning his hand at the same time. Harry let out a scream, that wasnt heard by the cheering crowd, and looked at the hand that was holding the Snitch. Through the blood covering it all over, Harry saw that several spikes had protruded from the Snitch, and impaled themselves through his hand.
Chapter 25- The Final Duel
AAAHHH! yelled Harry, as loud as he could, which wasnt nearly enough to beat the cheering crowd. It wasnt until the rest of the Gryffindor team came over, ready to congratulate Harry and begin a celebration party, that anyone else realized something was wrong.
Get Madam Pomfrey! yelled George to the approaching crowd of fellow Gryffindors, and some Ravenclaws and Hufflepuffs when he saw the fountain of blood pouring out of Harrys hand. There were some screams and yelps of fear, but luckily some of the students ran to get the nurse.
Hold on Harry, said Fred. He grabbed hold of Harrys impaled hand and the Snitch, and pulled as hard as he could, trying to separate the two.
AAAHHH! yelled Harry. It was even more painful with Fred pulling on it, and it felt like it was only getting more secure. Fred, youre not helping! Harry fumbled for his wand in his pocket, gritting his teeth, and squinting his watery eyes from the pain. He found it, and pointed it at his mangled hand with a shaky arm.
Sendoni Farmaki! he grimaced. A small, fluffy, white cloth shot out of his wand, and wrapped itself around his hand. Just as quickly as it had wrapped itself around, though, it became saturated in blood, and was turning from pure white, to a dark red. 
Finally, Madam Pomfrey arrived, panting, with red cheeks, with a group of students behind her. She took one look at the bloody cloth, and started pulling Harry to the hospital wing, not saying a word.
It was by far the worst after-Quidditch event that had Harry ever taken part in; staying in the hospital wing for several hours, being constantly visited by people, some he didnt even know. All of the annoying first year Gryffindors stopped by too: Joe wrote him some sort of incomprehensible get well note (| <3 j00 |-|4rrY g3+ \/\/3|_|_ $00|\|!), Mike made him one thousand paper cranes that quickly flew away, Akshay gave him some sort of odd and fluffy penguin that he called Tux, and Chris well, we wont say what Chris did.
The only thing good about Harry getting his hand impaled by a spiked Snitch was that it distracted people from the fact that he showed he was an Animagus. All of the students did, however, ask the same question,
Who did it?
Harry was by far the most clueless in this matter. He was far too busy playing to take any notice of the crowds, to see if anyone was jinxing the Snitch, or if anyone had tampered with it beforehand. 
Many people suggested that it was Madam Hooch. She had constant access to anything that involved Quidditch, so she could have easily magicked the Snitch. But, there was no motive for her to do that, so, the rumor died almost as quickly as it had begun. 
Harry, however, did have a small idea. Maybe it was the person who had been sending him notes all year. Maybe he or she finally acted out on his or her threats. But who was it, and why would they do this? Telling Dumbledore that he had stolen his phoenix should be enough punishment, this was unnecessary.
The only thing that kept Harry happy throughout his time in the hospital wing was the Quidditch Cup. It was sitting right next to him, glittering in the light from the sunset. It gave off a radiance that was only equivalent to Chos. Even though he was in immense pain, Harry kept reminding himself, We won.
It had been Dumbledore who had brought the trophy into the room. He got passed Madam Pomfreys tendency to throw people out only because he was Headmaster.
Congratulations, Harry, he said when he placed the trophy on the table next to his bed. Congratulations on another great victory for Gryffindor.
Thanks, Professor, said Harry very weakly. He had just had the Snitch magically pulled out of his hand, and it wasnt the most painless thing in the world, nor was the after feeling of it he was having now. 
And shall I congratulate you now, for a victory tomorrow, in your duel? asked Dumbledore casually, sitting down at the foot of Harrys bed. 
Oh, Professor, I dont know, said Harry. With this hand? I dont know if Ill even be able to hold a wand, much less duel. This thought had been bothering Harry for a while. Would he be able to get revenge on Malfoy? 
Harry, let me tell you a secret. Animagi need never fear that.
What do you mean? asked Harry, confused. 
Harry, youve noticed, havent you? When you transform, you dont change an equal mass into another equal mass. Your wings, for example. They are much larger than your shoulder blades, so where do they get their extra size from?
I dont know professor said Harry.
Actually, Harry, no one does. Its just one of those mysteries of magic that will never be revealed. Anyway, Harry, what Im saying is, someone who loses their entire arm would still be able to transform their stub into the full animals arm.
So what youre saying is, said Harry, starting to catch on, is that I can just transform this mangled hand of mine into the paw of a gryffin, and I can use it as normal? The gryffins hand will not be damaged? Dumbledore gave his trademark eye twinkle, and smiled.
Exactly, he said. Trust me Harry I know from personal experience. 
You mean youre an Animagus? asked Harry.
Yes, said Dumbledore. He then took out his wand, and pointed to his long, crooked nose. You see this nose of mine, Harry?
Yes, professor, said Harry, trying not to laugh. It was a very odd sight, seeing an old man touching his nose repeatedly with a long wand. 
Well, people have always wondered why its so long, and crooked, and I know there are many theories and rumors, and everyones too embarrassed to ask. So, youll be the first to know.
When I was younger, becoming the wizard that I am today, I got into a fight. I came out of it with an unbreakable spell put on my nose that caused it to turn purple, and bubble and puss for the rest of my life. Luckily, I was an Animagus. I transformed by nose, just enough so that it became the flesh version of a beak. I have kept it that was ever since.
I see, professor, said Harry.
But, you need not worry, Harry, said Dumbledore. By the time the year is over, your hand will have fully healed, you wont need a paw for the rest of you life.
Professor, began Harry. I know this may be a personal question, but what animal are you? Dumbledore smiled.
Oh Harry, I cannot say. There is a reason I dont announce why my nose is this way. You see, I am an unregistered Animagus.
This took Harry by surprise. It wasnt normal to have Dumbledore try and be above the law. Why didnt he just register?
Me being an unregistered Animagus gives us a surprise advantage over Voldemort, said Dumbledore, as if sensing Harrys question. Even though it would be terrible beyond belief if it ever came to this, but, if Voldemort and I were forced to fight, I am sorry to say that he would probably win. My only chance to win would be the element of surprise. So please, Harry, dont tell anyone. 
Of course not, said Harry quietly. 
Dumbledore sat up from the bed, and looked like he was about to turn out the door, when he turned around. Speaking of being hurt and all, Harry, Fawkes has been acting very peculiar lately. Been getting sick a lot, not being his usual illustriousness you wouldnt happen to know anything about that, would you?
Harry swallowed hard. Did Dumbledore suspect him of tampering with Fawkes? Did he think that the copy he had was not the real thing? 
No, professor, said Harry, trying to sound as serious as possible. Havent a clue. Dumbledore smiled, nodded, and left the room. Harry sighed, collapsed backwards into his pillow, and just hoped that clones didnt wear out.
Harry was awoken the next morning by a violent shake from Ron.
Get up! he yelled. Harry rubbed his eyes, and quickly put on his glasses. He saw that Hermione and Cho were with Ron as well. 
Are you coming down to the duel? asked Hermione.
Oh, I dont know if you should, said Cho. What with your hand
Dont worry, said Harry, grinning, Ive got it under control. He exposed his bandaged hand to them, and transformed it into the gryffins paw. He took the bandages off, and surprised everyone with his new hand underneath. Harry flexed his new fingers, and gripped his wand in his new hand. 
It was a bit awkward at first, holding the wand with three short circles rather than five long fingers, but he got used to it quick. Harry jumped out of bed, and walked down to the Great Hall with the three of them, talking excitedly about the duel.
I heard that whoever wins gets an extra fifty points for their house, said Cho.
Great! said Ron. Were one hundred points higher today, thanks to your win last night Harry, so that means we have-
Three-hundred and sixty points, said Hermione, holding her head high in the air. Ron stuck his tongue at her.
Yeah, whatever, said Ron. And Slytherin has four-hundred and five points so if one of us wins-
Gryffindor wins the house Cup by five points, said Hermione. Ron glared at her.
Win it again? said Harry when they reached the door to the Great Hall. For the fifth year in a row? Wow, thatd be cool. He threw open the doors, and revealed a room packed with students. Not a single seat was empty, everyone wanted to see the duel. 
Harry, Ron, Hermione, and Cho walked over to the side of the room, against the wall, awaiting the time for them to show off their dueling abilities. The hall grew quiet just then, as Professor Flitwick walked up to the head of the room. He tapped his throat with his wand, and spoke.
Hello students and teachers! he said, his voice magically magnified. I am happy to present to you the Dueling Club members, and the Dueling Club captain, Harry Potter! He presented his arm to the side of the room where Harry, Ron, Hermione and Cho were. Amid the applause, they walked up to the front, soon followed by other members who rose from various parts in the giant room. When everyone was up there, they instinctively took a bow, causing the room to applaud them. Harry couldnt help but smile. 
Now, continued Professor Flitwick, I am very sorry to announce that, due to tests tomorrow, we will have to shorten this dueling session. Only the top six most elite members of this club will duel today, resulting in five magnificent duels. I will now read the six names off. If you are not read off, I am sorry, but please return to your seat. Now, for the names: First and foremost, our captain, Harry Potter! Harry took a small bow, followed by an applause from the room. 
Next, tied for first place so far in the club: Draco Malfoy! Malfoy bowed, like Harry, but there wasnt as much applause for him. He didnt just win the Quidditch Cup.
Next: Hermione Granger, Ron Weasley, Cho Chang, and Sy- Syen- Tci! The four of them took a small bow as the rest of the Dueling Club sat down, back at their seats. After a short applause, it was time for the dueling to begin. 
As we did before, continued Professor Flitwick, the matching will be chosen randomly, and will be one on one. I have the six names in this hat, and they will be drawn two at a time. The two drawn will face each other.
The only different rule this time will be one that we should have used before. I will not countdown for the match to begin. This will be like an official, authentic duel, and each match will begin only by the first spell being used. Everyone ready?
The entire Great Hall, filled with every teacher and student in the entire school, yelled, YES! Professor Flitwick smiled, and dug his hand into the hat, and moved his hand around, shuffling the names up. He finally grabbed hold of two, and yanked them out of the hat. He smiled, and spoke loudly:
The first match with be Mr. Tci against Mr. Harry Potter! Everyone in the hall cheered as Hermione, Ron, Cho and Malfoy cleared the front of the room so only Tci, Harry and Professor Flitwick remained. He pointed his wand at the floor, and muttered something. As soon as he did, the floor magically expanded, making the tiny space that they had originally had to duel in almost the size of the original Great Hall. 
Professor Flitwick bounced to the back of the new space he created, and signaled for Tci and Harry to move into position. Harry swallowed hard as he walked up to duel Tci. In his last duel with him, Harry had barely won. 
Tci got into his regular position, (with many exclamations of excitement from the audience, seeing him do this for the first time) and Harry brandished his wand, ready to go. Harry waited for what felt like an eternity, all eyes upon him and Tci, seeing who would make the first move.
During his many weeks of studying, Harry had read much about dueling. He read that usually the weaker or more egotistical dueler makes the first move, while the wiser and more disciplined dueler makes the second. However, if more than several seconds passed, and no one made a move, the greater dueler was supposed to make the first move. 
All the thinking of who should do what and when made Harrys brain start to hurt. He decided to just go for it, and begin the match.
Expelliarmus! he yelled, aiming right at Tci. The spell shot out from the tip of his wand, and flew right to Tci. At first, it looked as though the spell was going to hit him. Tci hadnt made any attempt to defend himself, or move out of the way.
Just when Harry thought the duel was going to be over, and the spell was an inch away from Tcis face, he grabbed his Swand from his sheath, and covered his face with it; he moved so fast, he looked as though he stood still. The spell hit the blade of his Swand, and bounced right off of it, sending it flying to the almost infinitely high ceiling.
Karthiaki Prosvolus! yelled Tci, fencing his Swand on a direct path towards Harry. A red beam shot out of it. Harry remembered that spell as the Heart Attack curse, and though he didnt feel like experiencing it first hand. 
Kooverta! yelled Harry, holding onto his wand tight with his small paw. A small, invisible shield popped up right in front of Harry, and the curse hit it, disappearing. Harry jumped up, above the shield, and pointed his wand down at Tci.
Siragus! he yelled, transforming his shoulders into his wings, and hovering in the air, right above his shield. His spell hit the ground right next to Tci, causing him to wobble off to the side. He, however, looked unhurt, and jumped into the air.
Anataga atsuidesu! he yelled. No beam came out of Tcis wand, though. Harry, however, felt the effects of it anyway. The world around Harry was staring to melt away. Everything looked as though it were a painting that had water splashed on it. Everything melted together, making Harrys world a black oblivion in which he was hovering in the air. Suddenly, the blackness around Harry burst into flames.
AAAHHH! yelled Harry, immediately feeling the flames searing heat. All the blackness was gone, there was only fire everywhere. The entire world was just one massive inferno, and Harry was right in the middle of it. The flames seemed to be grabbing for him, trying to devour him. Each time one of their plasmatic tendrils lapped at his skin, Harry felt the hot burning sensation flow all over his body. Harry gritted his teeth, and tried to ignore the white-hot pain all around him, and the fact that he was drowning in his own sweat. 
Its not real its not real. he reminded himself. This seemed to give him power again, he tried to remember every happy memory he had ever had and was going to have. Im going to live with my mom, Im going to see her again, he reminded himself. He felt the burn of the fire start to cool down all around him. The more he reminded himself, the more the fire seemed to die down. It was the happiest thing he could think of. Though, he felt as if there was something else giving him hope, something else that wanted him back. The fire couldnt take all that happiness. Soon, all the flames were gone, and Harry was back in the black oblivion.
He stood there for a few seconds, looking around at the nothingness, wondering what would happen next, when the blackness exploded back into reality, causing Harry to cover his eyes from the pain of suddenly being exposed to so much light. 
When his eyes recovered from the shock, Harry was shocked and amazed at the sight before him. Ron, Hermione and Cho were around Harry, patting him on the back, and Tci was on the floor, with his wand off to the side. 
Wha- what happened? asked Harry as Tci started waking up. 
You spell, it hit Tci, said Ron.
What spell? I didnt use any spell, said Harry.
Oh yes you did, said Hermione, the Disarming Spell.
But, Tci deflected that.
Harry, said Hermione arrogantly, dont you know what the ceilings in this room are made of?
Um, no but I have a feeling youre going to tell me.
Theyre made of magical mirrors, to make them easier to enchant, said Hermione. Tci deflected your spell up to the top of the room. The spell hit the mirrors up there, and came back down to hit him when he was busy getting ready to put another spell on you.
Well, at least I won, said Harry, walking away from the arena. He would have preferred to have beaten Tci in a different manner, not having one of his old spells luckily hit his opponent while Harry was under his opponents curse. 
After some applause for Harry being announced winner, Professor Flitwick dug his hand back into the hat, with Tcis name removed. Tci sat back down at the Slytherin table, not looking especially distraught, but not happy either. He had a blank expression on his face, as if the outcome of the duel hadnt affected him at all. 
Everyone ready for duel number two? smiled Professor Flitwick as he dug his hand back into the hat. He moved his hand around, trying to get as random a match up as possible, while everyone around him was cheering. Finally, he stopped shuffling the names up, and drew two out. He smiled again, and read them off.
For our next match Mr. Ron Weasley and Mr. Draco Malfoy will duel! he said loudly. Harry cheered along with the rest of the room when Ron and Malfoy stepped into the giant blank space in the room. Harry, Cho, and Hermione stepped off to the side, out of the way. Malfoy and Ron both got into position.
Whenever youre ready duelists, said Professor Flitwick, jumping into the air, and hovering at his highest point. Ron didnt waste a second. He showed his weakness by attacking first. 
Fucillius! he yelled, shooting the spell right out of the tip of his wand, hitting Malfoy directly on the chest. But, Malfoy didnt even flinch. Ron just gaped at him. 
Wingardium Leviosa! yelled Malfoy. His spell hit Ron, and sent him flying up into the air. Malfoy then directed him to fly backwards, causing Ron to slam into the wall with a giant boom!. Malfoy brought him forward a little, ready to hit him against the wall again. Things were looking bad for Ron.
Come on Ron! Lets go! cheered Harry. Ron turned his head over to his direction and smiled. He pointed his wand at Malfoy just when he was about to send him flying back into the wall again.
Necro Poli! yelled Ron. A green skull with a small gassy tail trailing behind it shot forth from his wand, flying right towards Malfoy. The skull hit Malfoy in the arm he was holding his wand with, and passed right through his flesh, like a ghost. The skull disappeared after it passed through Malfoys skin, but the effects of Rons spell had just begun. At the place where the skull passed through, Malfoys arm was beginning to turn a dark green. Malfoy quickly switched the wand from his bad hand to his good one, but Ron had thought of that, and already sent another skull through that arm as well. Now both arms were a dark, muddy green, getting more decrepit by the second.
Expelli- ah! yelled Malfoy. When he threw his wand hand forward to give the spell more momentum, his arm flew right off. The lower part of his arm dislocated itself from the other half at the point where Rons spell had hit. His spell made the skin where it hit old, weak, and practically dead. At the slightest movement, they would fall off, and Malfoys throw made one of his arms go flying off.
His arm soared through the air like some grotesque bird, landing on the floor between the two of them. There was no blood, however, just some green goo from where the spell hit. 
Give up Malfoy! yelled Ron, grinning. If you use another spell, your other arm will just go flying off! You dont stand a chance. Harry felt very excited for his friend. Was Ron actually going to win?
Yeah, go Ron! he yelled. Malfoy, however, looked untrammeled. 
Well, I still have one more spell left, he said. 
Go ahead, said Ron.
Erhomo Dracono! yelled Malfoy, causing his other arm to go flying off, along with his arm. It flew threw the air, like his other one, and landed near hid other arm as well. Malfoy looked very odd, without any arms. Ron gave a small laugh as he started walking over to the arms, to pick up Malfoys wand. 
Just when he had about reached the wand, however, the was a rumbling in the Great Hall like a small earthquake. Ron stumbled onto the ground. Suddenly, the wall across from him exploded, and in flew Malfoys Hungarian Horntail from his Care of Magical Creatures class, looking more vicious and terrible than ever. Malfoy had trained it to be strong and fast. The dragon was extremely powerful, huge muscles were bulging all over the place. It also wore a large, metal suit of spiked armor that covered its entire back and head making it even more intimidating. 
The dragon was also far too large for the room. It had to hold its head all the way down to the floor to fit. It was unable to fly in the small space, but it was still far from immobile. It started quickly crawling its way towards Malfoy.
Get him, the red-haired one, grinned Malfoy, nodding his head in the direction of Ron. The dragon shot a look over at him, and blew out a cloud of smoke from its large nostrils. Rons eyes grew big as he started walking backwards, away from Malfoys wand on the floor, and towards the wall. 
Fo- fo- Fotia Poli! stuttered Ron, pointing a shaking wand at the dragon. A small beam of water shot out of his wand, hitting the dragon on it tough hide. It had no effect, the dragon continued to walk towards Ron, every second decreasing the time towards Rons defeat. Malfoy was laughing his head off, well out of the way of the dragon. Even though it was his, he knew better than to be near it when it was getting ready to attack. 
The dragon reared its head back, inhaling deeply. It opened its mouth wide, and a fiery orb starting forming right above its mouth. It became more and more visible by the second, glowing a darker and deeper red, then to a light-blue, then to a pure white, showing off just how hot it was. The orb of fire was spinning so fast that pieces of it were shooting off, flying through the air, until the piece came in contact with a wall, which it burned through, creating a sizzling sound, and a large, deep red burn.
Prepare to become a fireplace, Weasley! yelled Malfoy, over the intense sound and wind the orb was giving off. Just as the words left Malfoys mouth, the orb left the dragons. It banged its head forward, and when its neck was a maximum length, the orb of fire shot right through the air, straight at Ron, who was standing there, speechless.
The orb hit the ground right in front of Rons feet, causing a tremendous, fiery explosion. It blew Ron high into the air, all the way up to the ceiling of the Great Hall, and all the way back down again, colliding with the floor. The explosion also caused a massive amount of smoke and fire to appear all around the impact site, making everyone in the entire room cough. 
Anemos! gagged Malfoy, after he had run up to Ron, and grabbed his wand with his teeth. He was holding it in his mouth. 
A heavy wind blew forth from his wand, dissolving the smoke. When it was cleared, Ron lay face-down on the hard floor, his wand still in hand. The dragon was standing tall before him, with his arms crossed, looking quite satisfied with itself. It blew a puff of smoke out from its nostrils, and turned its mouth into what looked like a smile.
Malfoy just skipped over to his arms that were lying on the ground, and made them fly up to meet his stubs. He touched their place of connection with his wand, and they went back to normal. 
He then skipped over to Ron, and gently picked the wand out of his hand, with his pinky up. He smiled, and held it high in the air, causing the entire Slytherin table to cheer, and for Harry to feel as though he had just swallowed a bagful of ice cubes. Malfoy had slaughtered Ron would he be able to defeat him when his time came to face Malfoy?
By now, the cheering had stopped, and Malfoy was assisting Professor Flitwick in the cleanup of the dueling arena. He sent his dragon away, back through the hole it had made in the wall, and then Professor Flitwick quickly patched the hole up with a little charm. He also brought enervated Ron, and Malfoy threw him his wand, looking quite smug. Ron had an expression of disgust on his face as he walked back to the Gryffindor table, not even looking at Harry. The floor was now clear, and it was time for the next duel.
Alright! Whos ready for another round? I know I am, yelped Professor Flitwick, looking utterly ecstatic from the last exciting duel. He reached his hand back into the hat, his tongue hanging slightly out. 
Harry sighed, the odds were favoring him facing a friend if he had to duel this time. The only people that were left were Hermione, Cho, Malfoy, and himself. Harry wanted to duel only one of those people. Professor Flitwick seemed satisfied with the two random names hed chosen, so he brought his hand out of the hat, and threw it behind him.
Our two new duelers are Miss. Cho Chang-
Not me, not me, pleaded Harry to himself.
-and Miss. Hermione Granger! Harry gave a quick and quiet sigh of relief. Even though Cho and Hermione were on the way to becoming friends, they didnt have a relationship anything like Harry had with Cho. The both of them walked to the center of the large dueling area, and brandished their wands. Professor Flitwick jumped back and into the air, and the attention of everyone was on Cho and Hermione.
Should be pretty good, eh Potter? said Malfoy. He was standing right next to Harry, leaning against the wall, eating popcorn out of a small, colorful bag. Harry just glared at him. 
Youre not mad at me for beating your pathetic friend, are you? said Malfoy, pooping another piece into his mouth from the bag, smiling. I mean, if he had actually put up a fight maybe Id feel sympathetic towards him, but the way he just stood there, gaping at my dragon, he looked like a fool! If he had even tried another spell, maybe he couldve beaten it.
As much as Harry hated Malfoy, he had to admit he was right. Ron did not do very well in the last duel. He apparently did not face danger as well as Harry did. Harry, not wanting to admit this, decided to change the subject. 
Whered you get that? asked Harry, pointing to Malfoys bag. 
Oh this? said Malfoy, pointing to his popcorn. I just conjured it up. Muggles eat it at fun events, and this is certainly a fun event the two girls of Harry Potter, one against the other, who is more worthy of the legend? Want some?
Harry decided to stop talking to Malfoy, and now turned his attention to the duel, which hadnt started yet. Both Cho and Hermione were still standing like statues, looking at each other, waiting for the other to make her first move. Finally, Hermione started.
Kano Micro! she yelled.
Egoestesi! yelled Cho, less than half a second later, pointing her wand at herself. She glowed a bright yellow for an instant, and then Hermiones spell hit her, but it didnt have any effect. Cho still stood there, the exact size that she normally was. Hermione, however, was a different story. She was suddenly starting to shrink down to the size of a football. But, from what Harry could see, she still looked determined. She pointed her wand at herself. 
Engorgio! she squeaked. Just as the spell was about to pop out, Cho yelled,
Esiestego! There was a bright yellow flash, and Hermiones spell had hit her, but it was having no effect, again. Cho was taking the power of her spell, and she was growing five time her normal size. Hermione was starting to looked a little intimidated now, since she was about one-millionth the size of Cho.
Siragus! roared Cho. There was a giant explosion, right under Hermione, that made her fly through the air, and right at Cho. Cho grabbed her, and picked the tiny wand out of her hand.
Miss. Chang is the winner! squealed Professor Flitwick. Excellent use of the Limited Spells, the Backfire and Forefire spells, excellent job!
Cho smiled, and set Hermione down on the ground. She handed her back her wand, and increased he size so that she was her normal dimensions again. Cho then did the same to herself, and walked across the arena, back next to Harry. Hermione, looking untrammeled, walked back to her seat, and sat down next to Ron. 
What are the Limited Curses, Cho? asked Harry.
Theyre the spells I used. The Backfire Spell takes a spell that your opponent uses on you, and uses it on him or her. The Forefire spell takes a spell that your opponent uses on his or herself, and uses it on you.
Why are they limited?
You can only use them once in a while, they are extremely complex spells, and your wand needs to regenerate after their use.
Oh, I see. 
No offense, Harry, whispered Cho, but your friend, Hermione, is way too predictable.
What do you mean? asked Harry.
She did everything by the book. I knew that she wouldnt go first in the duel, so all I had to do was wait for the time to expire, and then shed go. I also knew that her first spell was going to be something that disabled me, and her second spell was going to be something that would help her. So, all I had to do was get ready to use the Limited Spells, and I knew I could easily beat her.
Harry smiled, that was Hermione, always looking to books for the answer, and then doing exactly as they said.
For our next match, said Professor Flitwick, just taking his hand out of the hat he had been shuffling the names in, Mr. Draco Malfoy, and Miss. Cho Change will duel!
Again? gasped Cho as she walked out for her next match. Even though the last duel hadnt taken much physical activity, it did take a lot of thinking, and Cho was wiped out. Malfoy, however, looked very rested from his last match as he made the bag of popcorn disappear, and wiped his greasy hands on his robe. He walked out to the stadium floor, grinning. 
Again, Harry thought as the two of them brandished their wands, he didnt know who to cheer for. If Cho won, hed have to face her, so he didnt want that. But, he also didnt want to cheer for Malfoy. He decided just to keep quiet. 
The two of them stood there for less than second, when Malfoy began the duel.
Anataga totemopiku! he yelled. Harry immediately over at Cho, to see its effect. Before she had a chance to react to Malfoys spell, she began to shake all over. She looked as though she was having a convulsion as she trembled, looking like a human earthquake. Her eyes rolled back into her head, and she started to foam at the mouth. She collapsed to the ground, practically drowning in her own drool as she shook even more fiercely. 
Malfoy only laughed when her wand came rolling off of her fingers, and right onto the ground next to her. He walked right over to her, doing a few spins and whistling. He kicked the wand into the air, and grabbed it right out of the air. He took a sickening bow, with Cho still behind him, and all of Slytherin House cheered for him. 
Thank you, thank you! he said sarcastically as he blew kisses to the audience. He walked back next to Harry, dropping Chos wand on her as he walked by her, and he left Cho lying there on the floor, quivering in a large puddle of drool. Professor Flitwick quickly came over and performed the counter curse on Cho. She immediately stood up, looking as if nothing had happened, and ran back to her seat in the Ravenclaw table, where she suddenly started crying into her arms. 
Harry wanted more than anything to run over there, and try to comfort her, but he knew he had to first confront Malfoy. He clenched his fists as he glared at Malfoy, who was standing right next to him. He gave Malfoy a sickening look, and Malfoy just battered his eyes at him, trying to be funny.
Not my fault if your girlfriends pathetic, he said shrugging.
Wait until the duel, wait until the duel Harry told himself, going against every nerve in his body to kill Malfoy, right then and there. 
Well, since there are only two duelists left, they might as well come on up here and get ready! squeaked Professor Flitwick. Malfoy and Harry glared at each other, and walked up, side by side. Malfoy spun around when they reached the center of the arena, and faced Harry. He smiled.
Well, he were go ladies and gentlemen, said Professor Flitwick over the excitement in the crowd, the two best duelists we have in this club both only defeated once who will be crowned as the best?
The Great Hall erupted into cheers of Harry and Draco, but Harry could barely hear them. All he was concentrating on was Malfoy. This duel was about more than revenge, or trying to be the best, it was now about defending the honor of his friends Harry had to win
Malfoy made the first move.
Expelliarmus! he yelled. Harry just shuffled to the side, avoiding the beam.
Ekathormirio Oplo! yelled Harry. The hall shook as hundreds of small, metallic balls flew out of his wand, all straight at Malfoy.
Fteros! yelled Malfoy, just before the balls hit him, pointing his wand at himself. He immediately sprouted some wings out from his back, and shot into the air like a bullet, avoiding all the balls which crashed into the wall, and disappeared. Taking the duel to the air, Harry transformed his shoulders into wings, and flew up as well, even faster than Malfoy did, and with more precision. The wings were a part of him, not a magical attachment, and he could utilize them better.
Ki Poli! yelled Malfoy, firing his wand like a gun. Harry didnt recognize this spell, but saw it coming at him. It was a fiery purple cloud, and it was moving rather slow, or slow for a spell. Harry easily dodged it. But then, just as he dodged it, he felt a pain in his chest, as though it had just been hit by a flaming cement truck, going two hundred miles per hour. It blew him backwards, making Harry hit the wall behind him, and creating a large hole in it. 
That was the Sprit Bird Spell, Potter, said Malfoy. Harry could barely hear him, the force of the impact from the spell and the wall had wiped him and his senses out. It projects a false image of the spell, with the real spell behind it. The real spell, of course, is invisible, so no one ever sees it coming.
He walked up right in front of Harry, who was now slouched against the wall. 
Give up, said Malfoy.
Never, said Harry, feeling renewed strength. He rolled over to the side, away from Malfoy, and then shot back up into the sky. Malfoy followed him, not far behind. 
Oplo! Oplo! Oplo! yelled Harry, blindly shooting spells behind him, trying to hit Malfoy who was tracking him. He heard Malfoy give a yelp, and knew that one of his spells had hit him. Harry turned around, and saw him on the ground, rubbing his head. He looked up at Harry, and touched his wings with his wand to make them go away. Harry flew down to the ground, and transformed his wings back into his shoulders.
You know what, Potter, said Malfoy, folding his arms, Im getting tired of fighting you myself. I think its time to enlist the help of a friend. he rose his wand into the air, and Harry realized that he was about to call for his dragon. He had to do something fast.
Expelliarmus! yelled Harry, aiming right for the wand that Malfoy was holding high in the air. The Disarming Spell hit it, and it flew right out of Malfoys hand. 
Accio Wand! Harry said quickly, and excitedly. He had practically won the duel. Malfoys wand came flying right towards him, and he caught it in his left hand. He shook the wand at the now shocked Malfoy.
Ha! Take that Malfoy! The duel is over, and I win! yelled Harry happily. Malfoy, however, was looking quite unhurt. He folded his arms again. 
No, Potter. I think this duel had just begun.
What do you mean? asked Harry. I have your wand! Malfoy smiled.
For this, he said, I do not require a wand he closed his eyes, and tilted his head up to the ceiling, and Harry felt faint again. Malfoy was transforming, right before his eyes. It took less than a second for Malfoy to fully transform into his beast, and when he was done, Harry dropped his wands out of his hands, and they fell to the floor, covered in sweat. Harry fell to his knees, and gaped, wide-eyed at the abomination that lay before him.
There was only one was to describe Malfoys animal: lethal. It was twice the width of a Hungarian Horntail, and at least three times as tall, though the room appeared as though it was somehow making itself grow larger to be able to contain it. The thing had three heads: the one in the middle was some sort of serpent with spikes coming out all over its face, and having at least twenty eyes. The heads on wither side of that one were both giant basilisks, their red eyes blazing the room. The three heads lead down to the giant body that looked like a dragons, only it had six arms: three on either side. All six of them were just as deadly as the heads, and looked just as painful. Each hand had seven fingers, and they looked more like long, thick needles than digits. The legs were large and muscular as well, and had three sharp toes at the base. The monstrosity also had a long tail, that looked like a snake, only with a giant flame at the end instead of a head.
The beast spread its massive flaming wings, which looked like infernos, and then gave a loud, ear-piercing, deafening shriek that rang throughout the entire hall, causing everyone to cover their ears. The beast glared down at Harry, and gave a smile one all three heads.
Like it, Potter? came a voice in Harrys head. It felt as though he was thinking in his head, only someone else was doing it for him. Yeah, its me, Draco. I just wanted you to see what I have become, how impressive and awesome I really am, before I crush you.
How are you talking to me? said Harry in his head. His forehead was hurting slightly but why? Voldemort wasnt anywhere near here. 
Draco laughed.
Potter, didnt McGonagall teach you anything? All Animagi are connected, its like were all in our own world, separated from the rest. Its a bond that we must all share, even if those we share it with are inferior, may I say?
So what animal are you? thought Harry.
Cant you tell? said Malfoy. I am a mixture of five beasts: Dragon head, body, tail and arms; two Basilisk heads; a Hentai head; a Atsuai tail; and phoenix wings. I am the greatest of all animals, the best from the best.
So that is what youve wasted all that time trying to become? Some sort of weird freak show? Your basilisks arent even petrifying anyone! said Harry when he picked his and Malfoys wands up from the floor, trying to throw Malfoy off.
Ha! The only reason Im not petrifying people left and right is because McGonagall made me lower the basilisks eye power when around people. And a waste of time? Is that what you think this is? Let me show you the power of this freak! yelled Malfoy in Harrys head.
The beast put all of its hands together, forming a large circle. It then let out a loud scream, and separated them, spreading them as far apart as possible. Connecting all of the hands was what looked like a light green energy sheet. It looked almost liquid. The beast let out another noise, and a huge beam of light, the same dimensions as the energy sheet connecting the hands shot out of it. It flew right at Harry, causing a tremendous explosion. Fire exploded all around him, and Harry was so engulfed in the flames, he wasnt even blown away. 
AAAHHH! yelled Harry. He had to try and keep his cool though Aqua Nero! A large cloud popped out of his wand, and flew right above his head, letting down gallons upon gallons of rain in seconds. The fire around him was soon put out. Harry then turned his attention to Malfoy.
Stupefy! he yelled, aiming right at the monster. His spell shot out of his wand, and hit the beast, right in the stomach, but it bounced right back off like a mirror. 
Ha ha ha! yelled Malfoy in Harrys head. Dont you know that phoenixes and Hentai are both almost invincible to spells? With both of their greatness combined, I am invincible to all spells! Even the Killing Curse wouldnt affect me!
Harry swallowed hard as Malfoy reared all three of his heads back, getting ready to strike again. What could he do? All spells were useless all he could do was stall until he thought of something.
The three heads shot forward. The Hentai head in the middle spun its spikes around, giving off some sort of massive electrical attack, and the Basilisks shot a mini inferno from their mouths, able to do that by the Atsuai in them. The three blasts all came close of hitting Harry, and each created more explosions and holes all over. More and more fire was appearing. All that Harry could do was look up at that scaly head, and hope whatever it was going to do wouldnt hurt too much.
Then it hit him. Scaly skin! The beast that Malfoy was, was made up of almost all reptiles, everything except for the phoenix wings. A reptile that large would need a lot of heat to stay warm, since theyre all cold blooded, and Harry guessed that was the job for the massive flame on its tail. All Harry had to do was lower the temperature enough to render the monster frozen. Cho had taught him that spell a long time ago.
Apendo Keros! yelled Harry, as loud as he could, emphasizing every syllable. He pointed his wand down, indicating that he wanted the temperature in the area to go down.
The effect of the spell was immediate. Harry grew goose bumps the second he cast the magic, and felt his skin go clammy and blue. He could see his breath in the air. From the top of the room, snow was beginning to fall. 
Malfoy was feeling the spell as well. When Harry cast the spell, it was getting ready to shoot another round of fire and electricity from its mouths. Now its heads were stopped in their spots, leaned over Malfoys back. The three heads were coughing, and Harry could see the icy breath come out. The color of the beast was going from a dark red, to a light blue and green. The fire on its tail went out, and it gave a loud scream.
What have you done!? yelled Malfoy in Harrys head, as he collapsed to the ground, creating a mini earthquake.
Beaten you Malfoy, thats what I did, responded Harry. The beast gave one last yelp, this time very weak. Then, the monster started growing smaller. The three heads fused together to form one, and then shrank down to normal size. Four of the six arms disappeared into its sides, and its legs shrank back to normal. Finally, Malfoy was left there, in the middle of the arena, shivering like crazy under a small pile of snow. Harry couldnt help but smile.
Harry Potter is the winner! yelled Professor Flitwick, changing the temperature of the room back to normal. Everyone cheered loudly for Harry. Some of his fellow Gryffindors came up, and put him on their shoulders, chanting, Harry! Harry! as they walked around the room, holding him up.
Professor Dumbledore, whom Harry had just noticed was off into the corner of the room, and had watched the entire duel, set off a series of small fireworks and banners, balloons and glitter. Harry felt as though he had just won the Quidditch Cup again. 
Harry looked behind him, and saw Crabbe, Goyle, and Ginny next to Malfoy, who was still lying on the floor. Crabbe and Goyle helped him up, but he threw them off, and he fell onto Ginny, who helped him walk out of the room, away from Harrys throng of supporters.
Just another day in the life of Harry Potter, eh? said Ron, who was in the midst of the people surrounding Harry. Harry smiled at him.
Win the Quidditch Cup one day, win a dueling tournament after that whats next? Get sixteen O.W.L.s? Just then, it hit Harry. He jumped off the hands of his supporters when they were halfway back to the Gryffindor common room. 
Oh no! he said to the shocked group. The O.W.L.s are tomorrow! Ive got to study!
Harry, Ron and Hermione ran off to library with a few other fifth-years who had been caught up in the excitement as well. There, they read every book they could get their hands on, not really caring what it was about, and mentioning Harrys victory every now and then, saying how great he did. They memorized every date, detail, and description they could, until each person collapsed into a book. 
Harry fell asleep in the pages of Every Countercurse There Is: And More! at around four in the morning. He was awoken by Hermiones violent and excited shakings, and ran off to his first period class, grabbing a piece of toast from the Great Hall. He arrived to the classroom with Ron and Hermione right behind him, ready to being taking their tests. 
Chapter 26- The O.W.L.s
Harry sat there at his desk, quill and ink out, ready to go. He looked around to see the rest of his class, and saw everyone was either sitting there quiet, or doing some sort of nervous habits. Ron was biting his fingertips, Hermione was twirling her hair, and Harry just realized that he was batting a quill against his desk. 
His first test would be in History of Magic. Harry had heard, from the older students, that this test was by far the most dull and boring, which was expected, since it was their most monotonous class. Harry swallowed hard when Professor Binns entered the room through his chalkboard, many papers in hand.
I have here your History of Magic O.W.L.s, groaned Professor Binns as he passed out the tests. It is a written exam. When you finish, bring it up to me, and if you want, you will be given the Advanced O.W.L. prompt. You may begin.
Everyone in the class flipped the thick test over and grumbled. The entire examination was short answer and essays. No multiple choice, no true or false, no fill in the blank. All long, boring answers. Harry paced his way through it, not skipping anything. If he didnt know the answer, he just made something up, wanting it to be over as soon as possible. 
An hour and a half later, Harry finished the test. He was exhausted. He almost collapsed onto his desk when he wrote the last letter to the last answer. Wanting to never see the test again for the rest of his life, Harry got up as quickly as he could, and handed it to Professor Binns.
Thank you, Mr. Potter, he said. Do you want the Advanced O.W.L prompt? Harry groaned quite loudly. While he wanted to do as well as possible, he also didnt want to think about history for the rest of his life. There was a battle going on in Harrys mind and, rather unfortunately, the success in school side won.
Sure, Ill take it, moaned Harry. Professor Binns took out a small piece of paper, and handed it to him. Harry walked back to his seat, and read it to himself.
Choose a moment in history, and reenact it with one other person. You will be graded on accuracy and amount and quality of information given. The top two groups or individuals with the highest grade will get the Advanced O.W.L.
Harry looked around, seeing who he could work with. Harry saw that Ron had just gone up to pass his test in, so when he came back to his seat, Harry grabbed his arm.
You want to work together on this? Harry asked him. Ron shrugged.
Sure, why not? Ron pulled his desk over to Harry.
What event should we do?
Well, we could always do the night You-Know-Who was destroyed, said Ron, quite loudly. We even have one of the people that was there, a guaranteed A plus! Harry glared at him.
No.
Well, it was a significant point in time
Come on Ron, we only have twenty-five minutes!
Fine, fine, fine! How about when Hogwarts was decided to be built? Weve gotten enough details from that about Professor Binns, we could do a perfect job.
Okay but Im Godric Gryffindor, said Harry.
As long as Im not Slytherin. said Ron.
They rehearsed their reenactment for the next fifteen minutes, and when the time came to present, Harry saw that three groups were trying for the O.W.L.: he and Ron, Parvati and Lavender, and Hermione by herself. One of the groups would not get it.
Miss. Granger, you are up first, said Professor Binns. Hermione gracefully walked up to the front of the class, and reenacted the Speech of 1945: the speech that Dumbledore gave the day before he and his army of wizards attacked Grindelwalds fortress. She did a flawless job, and emoted perfectly. Everyone, including Professor Binns applauded for her as she skipped back to her seat, the O.W.L. practically hers. 
Harry and Ron were next, and their presentation was pathetic compared to Hermiones. Harry and Ron kept switching back and forth from being Godric Gryffindor to Salazar Slytherin and Rowena Ravenclaw to Helga Hufflepuff at awkward times. Ron kept missing key lines, and Harry tripped over his wand twice, while spinning around to show his transformation between his two people. By the time they were done, half the class was asleep, and those who were awake said nothing. Even Professor Binns looked more gloomy than usual.
Well, lets just hope Parvati and Lavender do a worse job than us, said Ron to Harry when they sat back down to their seats. 
Misses Patil and Brown, your turn, yawned Professor Binns. Both of the girls walked up to the head of the class, grinning widely. Parvati was holding a cloth in her hand that looked like a wrapped baby, and Lavender was wearing a monsters mask. Parvati clutched the cloths tightly to her head, and Lavender brandished her wand.
Give me the boy! she yelled, in as deep of a voice that she could. It gave the intonation of something very evil.
No! Youll never get Harry! squealed Parvati.
Harry went red, and put his head into his arms. The entire class was now looking at him, because he was the topic of their reenactment. They must have overheard his and Rons conversation over what topic to do, and decided to take their rejected idea.
Even though they did a good job in their presentation, it was still one of the most embarrassing moments in Harrys life. They acted out every detail, just as Harry had seen it in his dream. They went all the way up to the part when Voldemorts curse deflected back on him, and to demonstrate that, Lavender pointed her wand at herself, and teleported outside the classroom. Everyone clapped when she came back in, and then the bell rang, signaling the end of class.
Good luck on your next test! said Professor Binns, looking more cheerful than Harry had ever seen him. 
That test was surprisingly easy, said Hermione, as they walked to the Transfiguration classroom, for their next test. I could have skipped reading several books that I glanced at.
Yeah, whatever, Hermione, said Harry, who didnt thank the test was nearly that easy. At least well all probably get Advanced Transfiguration O.W.L.s since were Animagi.
They reached the Transfiguration class, just as the Slytherins were leaving it. Harry sighed as Malfoy passed him by, anticipating some sort of insult. But, Malfoy just walked right by him, not saying or doing anything. He was probably still sore about his two losses in a row, and wasnt in the mood to traumatize Harry. 
Harry shrugged, walked in the room, and took his seat. The rest of the class soon filed in, and Professor McGonagall rose from her desk, and spoke,
Hello students, having fun so far? she said, smiling. Everyone groaned. Well, only six more to go! Think of it that way, and it doesnt seem so bad. She started passing out the written tests to everyone. Harry was relieved that this test wasnt nearly as long as his History of Magic exam, and it had some easier questions too. Harry breezed through the test, having read an entire book on Transfiguration the previous night. He had also heard Professor McGonagall talk so much about her other classes and such during his Animagus classes that he probably knew more about the subject than most Seventh Year students.
The last question was by far the easiest: If you were an Animagus, what animal would you be and why? Harry just wrote that he would be a gryffin, because he is an Animagus, and that is his animal. Duh. He skipped up to the front of the room, and gave his paper to Professor McGonagall. 
Thank you Mr. Potter.
Do I get to start on my Advanced O.W.L. yet? asked Harry.
No, not yet, said Professor McGonagall. Once everyone has finished the exam, we will begin.
Alright, professor, said Harry as he walked back to his seat. He didnt wait too much longer, Neville was the last person to pass his test in, and that was only about fifteen minutes later. Professor McGonagall shuffled all of her papers together, and put them away into her desk drawer. She waved her wand, and a giant, blue box appeared. It looked like a large, square shed. 
For your Advanced O.W.L, she said, you will enter this room, and perform the task I tell you. Afterwards, you will exit the room, and NOT TELL ANYONE WHAT THE TEST WAS! Anyone who gives away what the answers are will get ZERO O.W.L.s, and be expelled from this school for the rest of their life!
Everyone swallowed hard, she wasnt usually this strict. But, the O.W.L.s were major business, and she didnt want anyone not to take them seriously.
If you want to try your luck at this test, line up in front of this room, and wait until I call your name.
Harry stepped forward, right in front of the small, conjured box. Hermione and Ron came over as well, along with most of the class. Only Seamus and Dean chose not to participate, everyone else wanted to try. Professor McGonagall walked into the room she made, through some invisible door.
Ron Weasley! Youre up! she yelled from inside the room. Ron walked through the invisible door and disappeared. Everyone immediately started talking about what the test could be. 
Ill bet you have to turn a needle into a buffalo! yelled Neville.
Maybe you have to become an Animagus in ten minutes! said Parvati.
Yeah right, said Harry. It took me months to become one, theres no way someone could do it in ten minutes.
Lets see you transform! squealed Lavender. Suddenly, the entire room became focused on Harry, all chanting for him to morph. Harry glanced at Hermione, waiting for her approval. She knew more about what he should and shouldnt do as an Animagus than he ever would.
Go for it, she said, smiling. Harry stared at his crowd of admirers, and focused his mind on the gryffin. He closed his eyes, and thought about its skin color, its shape, every delicate detail on its body. When he opened them up again, he was several feet shorter, looking up at the group of people through the eyes of a gryffin. 
Everyone gave sounds of amazement, some oohs and aahs. Parvati and Lavender starting petting and stroking Harrys mane and fur. Harry made a purring noise which just encouraged them to do more. It was an experience like he felt at the theater with Cho, pure happiness and pleasure. 
Just as Harry was beginning to really enjoy the scratching and smoothing sensation, Ron popped out from the room, and all attention turned to him.
What was it?
Was it hard?
Did you have to make a buffalo?
To all these questions, Ron have the same answer:
I cant tell you. Everyone sighed, and the next person was called in.
Lavender Brown! Lavender confidently walked into the room, and disappeared. This time, the entire room was quiet, as if trying to hear what was going on inside. Ron was off to the side of the room, trying to resist any temptation to tell anyone what the test was. Within no time, however, Lavender popped out of the room with a happy expression on her face.
That was much easier than I thought it was going to be, she said gleefully as she walked over to Harry, whom she was disappointed to see was back in his human form. 
Hermione Granger!
She walked into the chamber, and returned from it, what felt like seconds later. Harry saw Hermione mumble something like, Too easy, when she walked out, and joined Ron in the corner.
Parvati Patil!
Parvati entered, and left in no time. It was the same with Neville who went next. He seemed very confident in himself, and looked rather happy when he exited, quite the opposite of what Harry had thought his expression was going to be.
Harry Potter! said Professor McGonagall. Harry walked into the room, through the wall. It was just like walking through Platform 9 ?, or the door at the theater in Hogsmeade. It was a little cold, and felt like liquid, but that sensation was gone when he was fully inside. 
It was a large, dark room. It appeared quite larger on the inside than it had looked from the outside, something quite common in the wizarding world. Professor McGonagall was in the middle of the room, standing behind a table with the three large boxes on it. Before each box was a different object. Harry walked closer to her.
Welcome, Mr. Potter, she said. To get the Advanced O.W.L., all you have to do is beat the creatures under these three boxes. When I lift the box up, whatever is under it will wait for a few seconds, than attack the object before the box. It is up to you to transfigure the object into something that can defeat whatever is under the box. Each time, you will be given less time to figure out what to transform your object into. This exercise will test not only your transfiguration ability, but also your skill to think quick and accurately. If you succeed in defeating all three creatures, than you get the O.W.L. Ready?
Yes, professor, said Harry, wand out.
By the way, whispered Professor McGonagall, her hands on the sides of the first box, you, Weasley, and Granger will each be getting the Advanced O.W.L. anyway. Becoming an Animagus requires more skill than many adult wizards have, and you deserve some reward. And by the way good job beating Malfoy the other day. He told me he was going to do that, and I really expected him to beat you.
Thanks, professor, said Harry, grinning.
Ready set go! yelled Professor McGonagall. She lifted the box up quickly, and revealed what was underneath it. It was a fly. Only, it was about fifty times larger than a normal sized fly, around the dimensions of a hamster. 
Harry looked down at the object he had to transfigure. It was a worm. Since it was already alive, it didnt require much skill to transfigure. Harry just pointed his wand at it, and it immediately turned into a massive, green frog. The frog lapped out its giant tongue, and sucked in the fly, crunching it down its throat before it had a chance to make a move. 
Excellent job! Next! said Professor McGonagall as she threw the box over the next creature. It was revealed to be a snake. It sprang up and hissed at the object Harry had to transfigure: a piece of parchment. Harry took out his wand, and pointed it right at the sheet of paper. He concentrated on what it would become, and suddenly it morphed into a small dragon. It was black all over, and about the size of basketball. It gave a high-pitched roar, and a burst of flames shot from its mouth, incinerating the snake.
Great work! Last one! said Professor McGonagall as the next box went flying into the air. It turned out to be a small Hentai, a creature that had been part of Malfoys beast. It looked like a snake, only it was thicker, shorter, and on fire all over. It also had millions of assorted spikes, where its head should be. Distributed between various spikes were hundreds of small eyes. It made its spikes spin like small drills, and glared at the thing Harry had to transform. It was a needle.
Harry once again pointed his wand, and concentrated on what his needle should be. This time, however, he was too late. The Hentai had already started devouring the needle, and it was halfway into its mouth. The Hentai swallowed it when the needle began to transform. The Hentai started to grow and bulge in all directions as once. It gave a loud shriek, and then it exploded into a bloody puddle. Where it used to be, there was now a large bowling ball.
Excellent work Harry! said Professor McGonagall. Great job, best of anyone so far except maybe Miss. Granger.
Harry grinned, and walked out of the room, returning to the rest of his classmates. He was soon followed by Professor McGonagall who tapped the room with her wand, making it disappear. She glanced at her watch.
Well, you still have five minutes until your next test, so Ill give you all a little break.
Their five minute break felt more like ten seconds. The bell rang loudly throughout the entire school, echoing throughout the halls and Harrys body, as if it were a signal telling him it was time to step up to the guillotine. He grabbed his books, and caught up with Hermione and Ron, heading to their next exam. 
So far the tests have been nothing short of preschool-grade! said Hermione. I could have grabbed any random child from a Muggle daycare, and he could have passed these tests! Ron and Harry groaned.
Oh come on Hermione! they said. Theyre not that easy!
Yeah, I failed the Advanced Transfiguration test, said Ron.
Well, at least youre getting it anyway, said Harry. 
Thats what I feel bad about, said Ron. I failed, and yet Im still getting the O.W.L. Is that fair?
Of course it is, said Hermione. You put a lot of time and effort into becoming an Animagus, you deserve something for it.
Yeah, I guess so said Ron, trailing off, looking longingly at the Great Hall, that was filled with the sights and smells of lunch. 
Come on, said Hermione, pushing Ron along, youll get plenty of food when the tests are over.
Yeah, but thats not until midnight! whined Ron. Hermione rolled her eyes, and they soon arrived at the Defense Against the Dark Arts classroom. They opened the door, and stepped in, taking their seats immediately, wanting to get the test over with as soon as possible. 
Harry noticed that the three of them were the first to arrive. No one else, including Mrs. Figg, was there. It was a while before everyone else entered, holding assortments of food and drinks from the Great Hall. Ron looked at Hermione with a why didnt we do that kind of expression, but she just kept staring straight ahead, trying to ignore any distractions. 
Take your seats students, said Mrs. Figg, taking the last few bits of a rather large sandwich. I will pass out your tests in one minute. She walked over to her desk, opened her drawer, and pulled out a large stack of papers. Once everyone was seated, she passed them out. When everyone had one, she said they could begin.
Harry, who was used to the drill by now, breezed through the test. It was easiest one so far, mostly multiple choice, with only a few long answer questions. He was one of the first to pass it in. He asked her about the Advanced O.W.L., and she said she would announce it when everyone was finished.
Once again, Neville was the last person to pass it in. Though, by the way he walked and moved and put the paper up, Harry suspected that he wasnt last due to lack of skill, it was just because he wanted to take as long as possible to make sure his paper was perfect. 
The Advanced O.W.L. will test your ability to do one of the most important skills we have learned all this year, said Mrs. Figg. It will tests your ability to resist pain. Those of you who wish to participate will come up before me. Every second, the pain will increase. When you are unable to take anymore, or if I see that it is unsafe that you continue, you sit down. The last three standing will get the Advanced O.W.L. Understand everyone?
Everyone nodded, and got up before her. This was the first time everyone participated in the Advanced O.W.L., and Harry was glad to see that Neville was trying his hardest and doing well. Maybe hed get a few O.W.L.s. 
Once everyone was lined up in front of her, Mrs. Figg took out her wand and pointed it at them.
Minnaga itaidesu! she yelled. A green cloud popped out of her wand, and spread to everyone. It engulfed Harry and he could feel it taking control of his body, telling him what to think, what to do and what to feel.
At first, it wasnt bad at all. Harry felt a tickling sensation mostly, all over his body. Then, around ten seconds later, it started to hurt. It felt as though someone with sharp nails was tickling him. The nails felt as though they were getting longer and sharper by the second. Then the tickling went away all together. It felt like the nails were being dug into his skin, only they werent fingernails, they were old, rusty, metallic, Muggle nails. 
Yeeowch! yelled Seamus throwing his hands into the air. The green cloud around him disappeared. Harry looked over, with clenched teeth, and saw that Seamus was walking back to his seat. His try at the O.W.L. was over.
The pain was getting even worse. What had felt like nails now gave the sensation of knives, slowing moving their way into Harrys flesh, piercing the skin, and wiggling around, excruciatingly slow. However, the pain wasnt getting to Harry yet. He concentrated on every happy memory that he had ever had: his date with Cho, Parvati and Lavender petting him, and the thought that he would be reunited with his mom soon. All the pain seemed to flow right out of him. 
Harry vaguely heard Parvati and Lavender scream from the pain, but it was a far away sound, like they were a mile away, and between them there was a lot of other static. Harry heard them walk back to their desks as he continued to smile and feel perfectly okay, even though everyone else was feeling flaming knives cutting their way into their skin.
The world around Harry was fading away. It was as if someone was making the entire world around him lighter, more gray, and he was staying the same. In fact, a distinct aura started to develop around Harry. He was glowing like a multicolored light, in a black and white world. All discomfort was gone, and Harry couldnt even remember what pain felt like.
Ass Harry became enveloped in the heavenly bliss, he vaguely heard Seamus then Dean then Neville then Ron fall to the floor. Harry turned his head, as if in slow motion, over to him. He saw Ron wriggling on the floor, looking like Cho had when Malfoy had used the Unblockable Spasm curse on her. Mrs. Figg ran over to him, and tapped him with her wand several times. He went back to normal, but none of that seemed to matter to Harry anymore. 
He saw Hermione finally give into the pain spell, and she collapsed to the ground as everyone else had. Harry started wondering what kind of pain he was supposed to be feeling. As he was thinking, Harry felt the sensation of walking backwards, even though he was standing still. The room seemed to be getting smaller, and Harry appeared to be getting farther away from it.
The room shrunk and sped away faster and faster, until it was the size of a marble, and looked like it was a mile away. Then, it just disappeared. Harry looked around, and saw, all around him, nothing but a white oblivion. There was no sign of the classroom, of Hogwarts anywhere. He felt as though he was being watched, though, and Harry thought he could hear quiet whispers all around him.
Harry squinted his eyes, to see if he could see anyone. He didnt see someone, but he did seem something. It looked as though it was a small puddle, only it was hovering above the ground, and it was moving towards him, flowing and changing shape as it did so.
As it moved closer, Harry thought he saw it begin to change shape. The liquid appeared to be hardening, like liquid cement becoming stiff. The hovering blob also started to grow limbs: two stubby arms and legs, and a small round head. The closer it got to Harry, the more and more human it looked. Fingers and toes started taking shape, and what looked like hair was growing out of the scalp of the head. Harry also saw eyes, lips, a nose, mouth and ears pop out of the head. 
The figure was morphing even faster now. The colorless blob was now a light peach, and the hair was turning very red, like Rons. The arms grew elbows, and the legs grew knees, and then Harry saw the eyes take a color. They became a green just like his. Once the figure was but a foot away from Harry, it looked perfectly human, and Harry recognized who it was.
Mom said Harry, with a dazed look. The person before him looked exactly like he had seen her in the pictures. The only difference between what was before him now, and what he had seen was this one seemed to have something more to it something alive, electric almost a soul. Harrys mom put her arm on his shoulder.
Harry she said, trailing off. It was the most beautiful voice Harry had ever heard. It flowed through him, all throughout his entire body. It made every cell in his body feel alive, as they had never felt before.
Full of immeasurable joy, Harry threw his arms up to his mother. Just when his fingers were about to touch her, he felt as though he had been caught by a fishing rod around his navel. He stopped right in midair, as if frozen.
Harry said his mother again. There was another tug at Harry, and he felt himself being yanked back, at what felt like hundreds of miles per hour. His mother quickly disappeared over the invisible horizon, and Mrs. Figgs room came back into focus. It rapidly changed from a dull gray to its full color again. Harry covered his eyes from the sudden flood of light. Then, just as his vision came back, so did his nerves.
AAAHHH! yelled Harry, collapsing onto the floor. It was pain as he had never experience before. It was as if millions of wizards were putting the Cruciatus Curse on him, each concentrating on a specific place on his body, strengthening its painful power over him. He was slowly being stretched to death on meat hooks while being burned to a crisp and acid poured all over his body.
Harry felt his eyes roll back into his head, and felt drool coming from his mouth. The pain was taking over his body and his mind. He couldnt even think of thinking a happy thought, it was impossible.
Then, just as quickly as the pain had come, it left. The green cloud around Harry disappeared, and his quavering arms fell from wriggling into the air, right onto the floor. Harry took several deep breaths, and wiped the drool from his mouth. He just noticed that everyone in the class was circled around him. 
Amazing! said Mrs. Figg, looking at her watch. Harry, I think you may have set a new record! Barely anyones ever prevented pain for that long! How did you do it? Harry stood up, and shook himself, trying to get fully back into this world.
My mom she helped me, said Harry. Everyone in the room gave him an expression of confusion, but the bell rang, saving Harry from having to make any other statements. Everyone except for Harry, Ron, Hermione and Mrs. Figg bolted out of the room. 
Harry, how did you do it? said Mrs. Figg, still looking amazed. You put off that curse for an hour!
Like I said, said Harry, grabbing his books, my mom helped me. 
Well, shell be happy to hear that tomorrow said Mrs. Figg, smiling. Speaking of which, I need you to come here, as early as possible tomorrow. Your mom was born at nine-thirty in the morning, so that is when well have the most magical power on our side.
Yes, professor, said Harry, running out of the room after Ron and Hermione.
You were amazing Harry, said Hermione immediately. I only lasted for four minutes. But you just kept standing, with this odd expression on your face. Some of us thought you were dead.
Well Im not! said Harry, throwing out his arms to clearly show that he was alive and well. He didnt know if he would feel right telling them that he saw his dead mother, and she put her hand on his shoulder, calling his name. Harry decided just to keep that to himself. 
Our next test is Charms, said Ron, looking at a piece of paper.
Thanks genius, said Hermione sarcastically. Were already there. Ron went red, seeing that they were right in front of the Charms classroom. 
They took their seats with the rest of their class, and Professor Flitwick took no delay in passing out their exams. He said that their Advanced O.W.L. tests could take a while, and he wanted to have time for it.
Harry, whose hand was beginning to hurt and cramp from all the writing he had done so far today, reluctantly finished the test. He felt he did quite well too, being one of the first done. Neville, who finished last again, passed his test in, and Professor Flitwick quickly put them away in desk. He had a kind of sinister smile on, like someone who was going to do something rotten, and enjoy it.
I think you all shall enjoy the Advanced O.W.L. test, even though that may defeat the purpose of having the test at all, he said, smiling. This active exam will test both your physical and metal prowess, as well as your sharpness and quick thinking skills.
He grinned and tapped the floor with his wand. It caused the room to shake slightly, and then something quite unexpected: the floor opened up. It was like a massive mouth. Then, out of the floor, came a small stadium. It was a perfect square, with a small, colored turret at each corner. Large, magical glass covered the entire arena, but it was so clear, unless you were a wizard, you couldnt even tell it was there, and even if you were one, it was almost invisible. 
To get your Advanced Charms O.W.L., you will have to win a duel, said Professor Flitwick. Four of you will duel each other at once. We will start with two groups of four, and each group will face itself. The last two standing in each group will face each other, and the top three in that duel will get the Advanced Charms O.W.L. Simple enough for you?
Professor? asked Hermione. How will this test our physical strength?
That, said Professor Flitwick, is the fun part. You see, you, yourselves that is, will not fight. Each of you will clone yourselves, and force your clones to fight. The clones shall represent you in the field, and you may use any means possible to win, any spell you desire.
Harry could hear chuckles and whispers all around him. People were thinking of using the Unforgivable Curses, ones that were illegal to use on humans, spells that could torture and kill. Harry felt himself even thinking of using thembut then he thought, what if the clones that were fighting were like the ones he, Ron, and Hermione had made? What if they thought they were the real ones, and didnt want to just be pawns in a duel, just created to die? Before Harry could think to hard, though, Professor Flitwick started calling out group assignments.
Group one! You are Seamus Finnigan, Dean Thomas, Lavender Brown, and Harry Potter! Please come down to the arena and the rest of you, watch.
Harry got up from his desk and to the front of the room. He walked over to the red turret, Dean to the blue one, Seamus to the green one, and Lavender to the black one.
Clone yourselves, said Professor Flitwick, hovering in the air, observing the arena like a bird. Harry pointed his wand at himself, and saw the other three do the same.
Clonusout! he yelled. Quite quickly, a solid copy of himself appeared inside the arena, right in front of him. Harry had evidently gotten stronger over the course of the year, the last time he cloned himself, it took a few minutes. This one barely took seconds. He looked over, and saw that Seamus had just speared, and Lavender and Dean were still trying to get theirs. After a few seconds, however, theirs appeared. Each clone, Harry noticed, appeared to look as though it were asleep. 
Ready competitors? asked Professor Flitwick.
Yes, said the four of them together. Harry hoped his clone would wake up soon.
Well then, ready set go! he yelled. Just as he said the last syllable, all of the clones eyes opened. Each one looked alive, and ready to go. Harrys clone looked slightly worried, not knowing what was going on. He spun around, and saw Harry right behind him which, no doubt, added to his confusion.
What! Im y- I mean youre me! said his clone. Harry rolled his eyes and sighed. He didnt want to have to go through this again. 
Listen, said Harry seriously, I dont have time to explain right now, but I need you to fight those other three in there. Harry lazily waved his wand in the general direction of the other three clones. His clone crossed his arms.
Well I dont feel like it, said the clone. Just then, there was a flash of green light, and a think beam shot right passed Harrys clone. It made him jump, and Harry looked where it came from. He saw Lavenders clone, wand out and poised. Harry looked at her, and she raised a single eyebrow to him. 
Fine, explain later! said Harrys clone, taking out his copied wand. She almost hit me with the Killing Curse!
Good, said Harry. His clone was on his side, but he didnt have much time to think of a strategy. Lavenders clone was ready to strike again. Harry looked over at Seamus and Dean. Dean wasnt having too much luck, he was still arguing and pleading with his clone to fight. Seamus clone looked like he about to faint.
Clone! yelled Harry. His clone spun around, pointing to himself.
Me? he asked.
Yeah you! Who else!?
Dont call me clone, he said. Its derogatory. Harry rolled his eyes.
Fine, what should I all you?
Call me Harry oh no, that wont work. How about Harry Two? No, thats corny. Hey! I got it: Harold.
Whatever, said Harry. Harold! Take out Dean and Seamus! Use the newer Killing Curse! Harold nodded, agreeing, he threw his wand out at Deans clone.
Korosucide! he yelled. A sparkling black light flew out from his wand, and hit Deans clone. It glowed purple for a split second, before it exploded into billions of microscopic pieces, like confetti. A sickening happiness flowed through Harry. He couldnt help but smile. He had commanded someone to destroy someone else, and it was exhilarating. He had to do it again.
Now get Seamus! yelled Harry. Harold did the same to Seamus, blowing him into tiny bits. The same macabre joy came over Harry, and he grinned. Harold then turned to Lavenders ready to strike.
Korosucide! he yelled. The beam shot out, as fast as light, but it seemed that Lavenders clone was even faster. She teleported to the opposite side of the arena before the beam was even halfway to her.
While you were so busy taking them out, said Lavender, pointing to Seamus and Dean, I made my clone put a Teleportation Charm on herself, in addition with the Speed of Thought Charm. Now, she can move even faster than a spell!
Lavenders clone popped around the arena a few more times, to show off her intense speed. It would be almost impossible to hit her with any spell. To make matters worse, her clone was invisible most of the time, only appearing for a millionth of a second after a teleportation.
Now what? asked Harold, trying to follow Lavenders clone. Harry gritted his teeth. There was a way, put the same spells on his clone so they would be moving at the same speed. However, from what Harry had read, that was the most dishonorable thing to do, copy your opponents idea. It was far worse than losing a duel, even though you won. Most people who tried that were declared the loser anyway. Harry decided against it.
Hey Harold! yelled Harry, suddenly getting an idea.
What? 
When she teleports, shes not really gone from this universe, is she? Shes just moving so fast that you cant see her.
Yeah, but what does that do? Harry smiled, maybe he and his clone werent exactly the same. Since Lavenders clone was still in the arena at all times, even though she appeared invisible sometimes, she was susceptible to an Unavoidable Curse.
Harold! Use the Unavoidable Heat Curse! yelled Harry. Harold nodded, and took out his wand.
Anataga atsuidesu! he yelled. There was a red flash in the arena as the spell took action. It made Lavenders clone freeze in mid-teleportation, and fall to the ground. He had hit her.
Korosucide! yelled Harold, pointing his wand right down at Lavenders clone, who looked unconscious, lying at his feet. The spell immediately hit her, and she exploded into millions of tiny bits that soon disappeared into the air. Harry felt the surge of adrenaline pump through him again, making him feel more alive than ever. He almost envied his clone, who got to do the actual killing.
Harry shook his head hard, what was he thinking? Was he becoming like Malfoy, a vengeful sadist? Harry reassured himself, no. There was no way hed ever be like Malfoy. This was just a test, not with real people but they were real.
Harry Potter is the first place winner for this round, and Lavender Brown is the second place winner! announced professor Flitwick, de-railing Harrys train of thought. He skipped back up to his chair, and sat down next to Harry and Hermione.
I told you reading that Advanced Dark Arts book would help you, said Hermione. It was worth sneaking into the Restricted Section.
Yeah, I was the only one who knew the more powerful Killing Curse, said Harry, sitting down. That gave me a good advantage.
Yeah, that and being the only decent dueler down there, said Ron. Hermione and Harry looked at him.
What do you mean, Ron? asked Harry. 
Well, Dean an Seamus are easy enough, and Lavender didnt look that bad. But me, I have to go against Hermione and Neville!
Neville?! said Harry and Hermione together. Ron leaned in closer, and beckoned Harry and Hermione to do the same.
Well, you know, I sleep in the bed right next to him, and he usually keeps me awake all night with his terrible snoring. But, the past few months, especially the last few nights, he hasnt snored at all.
Maybe he got some sort of treatment, said Hermione. Ron shook his head.
Thats what I thought at first too, said Ron. To investigate, one night I took Harrys invisibility cloak after he fell asleep. I waited right in front of Nevilles bed, for him to come in. Not only did he come in long after everyone fell asleep, but he just laid there all night.
What do you mean, just laid there? asked Harry.
It was weird, said Ron, contorting his face, he just kind of lied down, but sat as well. He was also holding his hands oddly it was like he was reading some sort of invisible book. Every now and then, hed move his fingers like he was turning an invisible page, too. It was just weird.
So, what does that have to do with anything? asked Hermione, shaking her head.
Well, he just started doing that a few nights after the Yule Ball, the night he was acting strange. And, ever since hes started reading that book, hes done better in school too, except for his occasional falling asleep in class. I think whatever hes been doing has been making him smarter.
Harry and Hermione leaned back, and looked at each other. Just as they were going to make a comment, Professor Flitwick spoke again,
Everyone who wasnt in the last duel, please come down here now. That should be Miss. Parvati Patil, Miss. Hermione Granger, Mr. Ron Weasley, and Mr. Neville Longbottom!
Ron and Hermione walked down to the arena, amid many loud cheers from Harry. Ron went over to the red turret, and Hermione to the blue; Parvati walked to the green one, and Neville stood, looking quite serious, at the black one. Each of them pointed their wands at themselves, and made a clone. Surprisingly, Neville was the first one done, followed by Ron, then Hermione, and Parvati being last. Once again, each of the clones looked catatonic as it stood their, eyes closed and motionless.
On your marks get set go! yelled Professor Flitwick. The eyes of the clones shot open, and each turned to its original. Parvati seemed to be having some trouble convincing hers to fight, but Hermione and Ron, who had been through this rigmarole before, convinced theirs quite quickly. Unfortunately, it was not fast enough.
Siragus! yelled Nevilles clone, pointing right between Ron and Parvatis clones. There was a giant explosion, knocking both clones against the glass of the arena. Nevilles clone then turned to his next victim, Hermiones clone.
Korosucide! it yelled, without Neville even saying anything. Hermiones clone quickly did a cartwheel out of the way, but she wheeled right into the hole Neville had made. His clone smiled.
Serpensorta! Sendoni Asimi! yelled Nevilles clone. A long, green snake shot out of his wand, followed closely by a tough, silvery sheet. The snake flew right into the hole Hermiones clone had gone into, and the sheet covered the hole, trapping her inside with the reptile. There were several screams of terror that erupted from inside the hole, and Harry saw Hermiones clone try to escape from it, pushing with all her strength against the sheet. Nevilles clone was clearly in control of how this duel was going to end.
He turned his attention to Ron and Parvatis clones now, who were lowering themselves down from the sides of the arena. Nevilles clone waited until they were both back on the ground before he made his move.
Impalition! he yelled at Rons clone. Instead of a beam coming out, a large, wooden plank popped up from the ground behind Rons clone. He tried to move away from it, but the more he moved, the closer he seemed to get to it. After a few seconds, his back appeared at though it were glued to the block. 
Then, suddenly, a large, sharp, thin and metallic spike shot out from the plank, right through Rons clones stomach. There was a smatter of blood that shot from the point of impaling, it flew through the air, and landed on Parvatis clones cheek. Rons clones eyes got cloudy, and rolled back. With his last ounce of strength, he gripped the spike that was now covered in blood. His hands then went limp, along with the rest of his body, and he died.
Neville immediately turned to Parvatis clone, and gave a sickening smile.
Impalition! he yelled at her. The plank immediately rose up behind her. She desperately tired to run away from it, clawing at the air, but it was all in vain. The plank was now touching her back. Knowing what was going to happen next, Parvatis clone gripped her stomach, and let a tear roll down from her eye, running through the smattered blood on her cheek. She turned her red eyes over to Parvati, who didnt looked hurt at all, just disappointed.
Why did you make me? she asked through her tears. Was it just so I could d- The spike shot out from the plank, and impaled her as well, killing her immediately. Nevilles clone wiped his hands against each other, and smiled. Just then, there was another scream from Hermiones clone. She was evidently still alive.
Hentai Tsunami! he yelled. A flaming tornado appeared right above the covered hole that Hermione was in. Harry heard Hermiones cone scream, but only for a second. It was snuffed out by the tornado destroying her. The flaming tornado disappeared, laving behind only ashes and burn marks. Neville and his clone smiled.
It had to be the most grotesque and terrible vision Harry had ever seen, even worse than Azkaban. Hermiones clones carcass was laying in the hole, with a puddle of blood and ash around it. On either side of the hole was a plank with a person impaled on it, each one gripping the spike that went through him or her. Harry felt like throwing up.
Congratulations Mr. Longbottom, and Miss. Granger, said Professor Flitwick, you and your clones are the winners! Neville bowed to Professor Flitwick, and a tiny door appeared in the side of the arena that his clone exited from. The door disappeared, and the entire arena returned to how it normally looked: carcass-less, hole-less, and blood-less. 
Ron and Hermione stormed back to their seats, and Neville returned to his as well. Neville looked quite satisfied with himself, but a little tired as well, as if the spells really drained him. Ron and Hermione, however, looked downright miserable.
Whats wrong? asked Harry to Hermione. You still won, didnt you?
Thats not whats bothering me, said Hermione, pulling her chair out violently, and collapsing into it. Whats bothering me is the way Neville won.
Yeah, he was pretty good, said Harry. Hermione glared at him.
Harry, she said, he showed no pity, no mercy. He just killed them.
Well what did you expect him to do? asked Harry, putting his hands behind his head, to try and show in his body language that he didnt think anything was wrong.
Come on Harry, said Ron. You have to think there was just something wrong with the way Neville was acting, dont you?
Well, I guess so, said Harry. But we dont have time to discuss that right now. We have to go down for the next round. They looked over, and saw that Lavender and Neville were already back at the arena, their clones out and ready. Harrys clone was waiting for him by the invisible door into the stadium. Harry and Hermione ran over, Hermione to the red spot, and Harry to the blue.
Alright, everyone, said Professor Flitwick, this is the last round! The top three from this round will get the O.W.L., so basically, the first one out is the only loser.
Harry stared at Professor Flitwick. He wasnt acting his usual jolly self. It wasnt like him to speak of negative outcomes. But, Harry shrugged off that thought at Hermione produced her clone.
One two three dont go! Heh, only kidding go! yelled Professor Flitwick, making everyone stumble.
Harold! yelled Harry to his clone, having an advantage over Hermione and Lavender since he already knew his clone, take out Neville first!
Whatever you say captain, said Harold sarcastically, brandishing his wand at Nevilles clone, and yelling the Killing Curse.
Ardeur Booklier! yelled Nevilles clone, just before Harold cast his spell. A glassy fire popped up, going around Nevilles clone, forming a shield. The fire absorbed the Killing Curse, and it grew larger, and became a light blue instead of a deep red.
Whoa, said Harold, it took the offensive energy from the spell and somehow changed it into defensive energy, making his shield stronger! Harry gritted his teeth. With that shield up, the more Harold hit Neville, the more powerful he would become. Harry looked over at Neville and saw that he was smiling. Harry had to think of something.
Hermione! Lavender! he yelled. The two of them, who were trying to convince their clones to fight for them, looked over. Weve got to team up, to beat Neville! The two of them nodded, and their clones seemed to accept Harrys small speech as a reason to start fighting. They got into their stances. Maybe if they gave the shield too much energy to absorb at once, it wouldnt be able to handle it.
Avada Kedavra! yelled Lavenders clone.
Korosucide! yelled Hermiones clone.
The green light from Lavenders wand, and the black light from Hermiones hit Neville at the same time. 
Thatll get him, the fire cant take all the energy at once thought Harry to himself. 
However, they were better off if they had never used the spells. The fire absorbed them both, and turned a bright white; it was so bright, Harry had to shield his eyes. Neville was now laughing out loud.
Harry, what do we do? pleaded Hermione. Harry thought each offensive spell they used on it just made it more powerful. So, if they used a defensive spell on it, maybe it would become less powerful!
Hermione! Lavender! Use your most powerful defensive spell on Nevilles clone! yelled Harry. The two of the nodded, looking slightly confused, and ordered their clones to use the spells.
Ennervate! yelled Lavenders clone.
Kooverta Maximus! yelled Hermiones.
Bakatcha! yelled Harold.
Teaming up against me again, eh Harry? said Neville. Ha! Im not pathetic like I used to be anymore Harry, I can take whatever you give me and give it right back, plus some! Harry glared at Neville, watching him give a small laugh. 
Once again, the three spells hit Nevilles clone at the same time. At first, it looked as though it was going to work. The flame turned from its blinding white, to a light red. Then, just as Harry was getting his hopes up, it started spinning, swirling, and growing. Large chunks of fire shot off in every possible direction, destroying everything they landed on by causing it to burst into flames.
AAAHHH! yelled Lavenders clone as a flame hit her, sending her hair ablaze. She ran around the arena, as Hermiones clone desperately tried to put the fire out with some water from her wand, holding her hand over her hair, trying to prevent it from turning into a small inferno. After a few seconds, though, the flame shower stopped.
Its the most powerful shield in the world, Harry, said Neville. It absorbs offensive energy, and turns it into defensive energy, and it also absorbs defensive energy, turning it into offensive energy! Theres no way I can lose! Nevilles eyes started to bulge as he spoke those words, and he laughed out loud, with a huge mouth, showering saliva all over.
Now, Harry Potter, he yelled, let me show you the true power of what I have become! Clone, you know what to do!
Nevilles clone nodded his head, and brandished his wand.
Korewa Jigokudesu! he yelled as loud as he could, almost shaking the room. Beneath the feet of the other three clones, a small crack appeared, that grew larger, quite quickly. As it grew, it started turning a bright red, and appeared as though it was getting hot since the clones were wincing and trying to step off of the cracks, even though they were unable. Then, the cracks turned into holes right beneath the clones, and out of the abyss came an inferno, engulfing each clone. Harry couldnt tell if the fire was breathing, the way it flowed like a snake, it almost looked alive. 
Harry heard the screams that the clones gave, even though they were quickly drowned out by the roaring of the fire. Within seconds, however, the fire was gone, along with the crevices and the clones. Not even a pile of ash was left. Harry, Hermione, and Lavender just stood there, dumbfounded at what had just happened. Professor Flitwick broke the deafening silence with some applause.
Excellent work, Mr. Longbottom! Excellent! Top notch, I must say! I am always a fan of students who invent their own spells! He flew right over to Neville and wrapped his arm around his shoulder, like a father would to his son. He started talking to him, completely unaware that he only had about two minutes of class left, and he still had to announce the winners of the duel. Except for obviously Neville, it appeared to be a tie.
Ahem! coughed Hermione loudly, causing Professor Flitwick to look at her.
Yes, Miss. Granger?
Um Professor? The results? he looked at her for a second, as if not understanding what she was saying. Then, he appeared to pop back into reality.
Oh! The winners, yes. Well Mr. Longbottom, of course and you, Miss. Granger and well, Lavender did get her hair caught on fire, so, Harry beat her in that so, Mr. Potter too! You three are the winners!
Harry let out a sigh of relief, at least he had gotten the O.W.L. Hermione looked satisfied, and Lavender looked indifferent to his decision. Neville, on the other hand, continued to talk to Professor Flitwick. He still had a excited look about him, and his eyes looked large, and they twitched every few seconds Harry wondered if he was okay.
That was some spell Neville used, said Hermione, walking back to her seat with Harry. I wonder what it was.
You mean you dont know? said Harry, flabbergasted.
No, Ive never seen or heard of it before maybe Neville did invent it.
What? You can invent spells? asked Ron, getting up from his seat in the audience.
Well of course you can, said Hermione lazily, pulling her backpack on. Where do you think they come from? Grow on trees? Of course, it does take a lot of Advanced Arithmancy to get it down right, and a spell that powerful Neville making it oh, it just doesnt make sense.
Just then, the bell rang, and Harry remembered that he was only halfway through his tests; he still had four more to go. He rubbed his aching wrists, and walked out the door with Ron and Hermione, to their next exam, Herbology.
To get to the Herbology room, they had to pass the Gryffindor Common Room, whose door happened to be opened. Harry, Ron, and Hermione peeked inside and saw many younger wizards playing, along with some older sixth year wizards. None of them had to take tests today, all they were doing was playing games, and talking about what they were going to do over the vacation.
Luckies sighed Ron, as they continued to walk.
Well, theyll have to take the tests, same as us, soon enough, said Hermione. Ron still didnt look too happy. He decided to change the subject.
I wonder whats going to happen to Nevilles clone, he when they walked into the Herbology room. 
Well, seeing the sadistic way they treated the clones today, said Harry, they may just kill it.
No Harry, said Hermione, They wouldnt kill a clone for no reason. Professor Flitwick just did that so he could test our knowledge of advanced spells, spells that well need to know in the real world.
Yeah, when were all Aurors, said Ron, smiling. Harry and Hermione sighed. Ron used that way too much.
Soon, the rest of the class filed in, and everyone took their seats. As Professor Sprout began passing out tests, Harry looked around. The class looked smaller somehow. 
He quietly pointed this out to Hermione, who looked around too, telling him that she didnt see Neville.
Neville? Not make the Herbology O.W.L.? But, thats his best subject! Hermione put her finger to her lip, indicating to Harry that he should be quiet. Harry tired to concentrate on his exam, but it was hard. Was Neville okay? What did he do that would cause him to miss the most important exam for his best class?
By the time Harry was halfway through the exam, he started to forget about Neville, and began to work much faster, to make up for the time he had lost worrying.
Harry finished his test last, but it didnt really matter to him much. He just walked back to his seat, feeling no different than is he had passed it in first.
The Advanced O.W.L. exam was the most boring and easy one they had so far. Each of them were given a choice of many ingredients, and they had to choose the best combination of them to make a plant grow as big as possible as quickly as possible. 
Harry chose what he thought would be best, and his regular plant immediately sprouted ten feet into the air. Everyone else looked quickly at what ingredients he had used, and chose those as well. Suddenly, eight more ten-foot tall plants appeared. Professor Sprout looked appalled that everyone had done the same, except for Hermione and Ron. 
Hermione didnt use what Harry did, she put a small, thin silvery substance into the mixture she had made before. She poured it all over the pot in which her plant was in. The pot immediately exploded into a million pieces as a twenty-foot high, and just as thick, plant exploded out. Huge mouth-like bulbs appeared at the ends of several tendrils, and they grew quite fast as well. When they were about the size of basketballs, they opened up with a roar as teeth and lips appeared.
Very impressive Miss. Granger! said Professor Sprout. 
It was now Rons turn. Harry didnt see what he had mixed together. Ron poured it all over his plant and it took a second for any reaction to take place. Then, a small brussel sprout-like bulb popped out from the dirt. It grew larger and larger, until it was huge, at least having a fifteen foot diameter. It grew a mouth, just as Hermiones did, but instead of growling, this one let out a giant, smelly, loud burp.
Very nice as well, Mr. Weasley, said Professor Sprout, holding her nose from the stench. You, Miss. Granger, and Mr. Potter will each receive the Advanced O.W.L.
But what about us, professor? asked Parvati, also holding her nose. Professor Sprout glared at her.
You are lucky you will not be expelled for cheating, Miss. Patil, and that goes for the rest of you. You should be thankful I only am punishing you like this. Parvati bowed her head sadly, and walked off, to wait for the bell to ring with the rest of the Gryffindors and the Hufflepuffs.
Professor Sprout, asked Harry, a few minutes later, whats wrong with Neville? Will he be okay?
Neville? Oh, yes. He isnt feeling to good he shall be fine, though.
And what about his tests? asked Harry. However, just then, the bell rang.
Im sorry Mr. Potter, she said, I dont have time to talk. I need to prepare for my next class test. She shoved Harry aside and started making the plants and the mess they had made disappear. Harry, Ron, and Hermione ran out.
Hermione, how did you get your plant to grow so big? asked Ron. I thought Harrys was as big as it could get. Hermione smiled.
Well, I added a little special ingredient she said smugly.
What was it? asked Harry excitedly.
Unicorn hair, said Hermione. Its a very magical substance, concerning plants. If I had added more, the plant probably would have grown to the size of the room!
But Hermione Professor Sprout didnt have any unicorn hair available to use- oh I see, said Ron, catching on.
All I did was transform part of my arm into the unicorn leg. I pulled of a few hairs quickly, and put them in.
Thats Hermione, said Ron, getting good grades, even if it means putting part of herself into the potion!
Well, said Hermione, trying not to laugh which was especially hard since Harry was cracking up, you got the O.W.L. too.
Yep, said Ron, looking happy, my third one! I already got one in Transfiguration and Defense Against the Dark Arts. I succumbed to the pain right before Hermione, and she was the best except for you Harry.
They arrived at the Potions dungeon, ready for their next exam. Hermione threw the door open and there, at the head of the class was no other than Professor Snape. 


Chapter 27- Dungeons and Dragons
Ron stopped in his tracks, and turned white; Hermiones jaw dropped to the floor; and Harrys eyes became the size of baseballs. What was professor Snape doing here? He had been gone all year, why was he returning now? He glared at them, with his pointy nose, and greasy appearance. He looked no different than when Harry had seen him at Azkaban.
That will be five points from Gryffindor, he hissed at them, each. You are two minutes late, that is two minutes less that everyone will have to work on the exam. What are you still doing standing Potter! Sit down and get ready! Another five points!
Harry, Ron, and Hermione took their seats, not moving their gaze from Professor Snape. He was holding a thick stack of papers, and was passing them out.
I know all you are wondering the same thing, he said as he passed out the tests, why am I here? Well, I can answer that for you. I have been away all year, helping the Aurors try and defeat Vold- You-Know-Who. It has come to my attention that during my absence, a certain Mr. Fletcher watched over my class. Well, I know him, and we shall see if he did a good job teaching you, now wont we?
He emphasized the e as he glared at Harry, trying to physically show the same hate towards him that he always did. Through his cold stare, though, Harry saw a new warmth inside him, his eyes were on fire, not icy and cold as he remembered them. He also didnt seem afraid to say Voldemorts name anymore, from his stutter before. Maybe he knows something about Voldemort that makes him know his weakness so he doesnt think of him as a threat anymore. Though, Harry thought he had never heard Professor Snape refer to Voldemort by name, or by You-Know-Who before, so he couldnt be sure if he was being brave, or just trying not to scare the children. 
You have one hour starting now! he roared at them, spinning around and sitting down at his desk to correct more exams. Harry looked down at his test, it was even worse then Professor Binns. All it contained was ten pages all essays. Harry looked over and saw Hermione, already halfway through the first essay. He looked to his other side, and saw Malfoy, not looking his usual conceited self. Harry then turned his head back to his own exam, let out a loud sigh, and started writing.
A few seconds before the hour was up, Professor Snape sat up from his desk. Harry still had half of his last essay to write, and he quickly rushed through it, making the last few words nothing but illegible scribbles. 
Time is up! yelled Professor Snape, banging his fist down on the nearest desk, which happened to be Deans. He jumped at least a foot in the air, and fell over in his chair. Professor Snape remained indifferent to this occurrence, and grabbed his exam from the desk. He moved his head from side to side, looking disappointed with whatever Dean had written. He walked back to his desk, test still in hand, and grabbed a small pot, and two little containers that looked exactly the same. He placed the pot in front of Dean, and a container on either side. He then pointed his wand over the pot, and filled it with water.
Thomas, he said, with a sinister smile, your test disappoints me. Just after looking at the first page, I can tell that this is a failing paper.
I- I stuttered Dean.
Now now Thomas, said Snape, waving a finger, and grinning even more. I am not that evil as to fail you right now, I will give you a chance to make up for your pathetic test, by getting the Advanced O.W.L.
Re- really? said Dean, trying to looked happy.
Oh yes, said Professor Snape. He held Deans test right in front of him, and tapped it with his wand. He let go of it, and it remained in the air. Snape gave an evil grin, and tapped the test again. A tiny flame appeared in the corner. Dean looked terrified.
My test! he yelled.
Here is your predicament, Thomas, said Professor Snape, speaking extremely fast. Before you there are two identical containers. One, when mixed with water, will create a powerful anti-fire potion. The other, when mixed with water, will create an even more powerful lighter fluid, causing your test to turn into nothing more than a few ashes.
Now, if you wish to save your abysmal test, and attempt at an Average O.W.L., I suggest you now begin searching your pathetic brain for which substance will do which. If you succeed, not only will you maybe get the Average O.W.L., but you will get the Advanced O.W.L for passing this test. Come on now! What are you waiting for? Dean looked like he was almost in tears.
B- b- but I dont know which one is which, he whined. The entire bottom part of his test was smoldering.
Then you have not learned anything this year, Dean, said Professor Snape. And you must learn what you do not know quickly! Id say you have about ten seconds left. Dean immediately grabbed one of the containers of mystery substance, and opened the lid.
Nine seconds whispered Professor Snape.
Dean put his nose to whatever he opened, and immediately shot his face back. It evidently had some sort of powerful putrid odor.
Eight seconds
He grabbed the other one and threw the lid off, putting it to his nose. This one evidently had a better smell, Dean almost smiled after breathing in its scent. 
Seven seconds
He stuck his fingers in the good-smelling one, and was surprised to find a pink goo stick to them as he tried to pull them out.
Six seconds
Dean quickly threw that container aside and picked up the other one, sticking his fingers inside. A white powder stuck to his fingers, and held it to his nose.
Five
He sneezed.
Four
Dean set that container down. He was sweating now he evidently didnt have a clue as to which one was correct, and which was wrong. It all came down to a fifty-fifty chance, a guess, with a lot at stake.
Three
Dean quickly looked back and forth between the two substances, as if playing some sort of game to help him decide which one.
Two
Dean, not being able to wait any longer, chose the sticky substance.
One
Dean grabbed a bunch of the goo from inside the container, put some water on it, and threw it at his test, which was now a floating flame.
Zero.
The goo hit the paper. Then, it appeared that someone had hit the rewind button on the paper. The flames immediately disappeared and tiny pieces of the paper flew in from all directions, forming the original sheets. The paper fell from its hovering position, right onto Deans desk. He breathed a huge sigh of relief, and wiped the sweat from his face. Professor Snape, on the other hand, looked livid. He looked as though the Grinch had stolen Christmas, and he was supposed to get the best present of his life.
Dumb luck, he mumbled as he walked with clenched fists back to his desk, grabbing everyones tests as he went along. He threw them into a drawer, and shut it hard, causing an enormous bang!, making his hair fly all over the place, giving him a look of insanity.
This was the Professor Snape they had all known and loved.
For the rest of you that want to try at the Advanced O.W.L., he said through clenched teeth, please come up to my desk.
Everyone in the room, except for Dean, slowly walked up to the head if the class, making a circle around his large desk, which was now covered with papers. 
Now, the usual exam involves me chopping off one of your limbs, and forcing you to make a potion that will somehow grow them back, or heal them, he growled to them. Well, the Ministry of Magic thought that was going too far, so this year, Ive been forced to come up with a new test.
With that, he opened a drawer in his desk, and took out a small stack of tiny pieces of parchment. 
Making a potion is just as much about magic as it is about logic, he said, giving a slip to everyone. On this pieces of paper, there is a riddle about the ingredients for a potion. List the correct ingredients, and what the final potion will be. If you get them all correct, you get the O.W.L. And hurry up! Youve only got about forty minutes left!
Harry ran back to his seat, and looked at his sheet of paper. It read:
I am one third the word used when declaring something is,
One third piz,
And one third the word that a baby says. 
I am something you may find in your hair,
Under a car,
And inside fair.
The last piece of me is the god of gold,
It makes everyone greedy,
And keeps you very old..
What is the potion described?
Harry scratched his head hard. What kind of test was this? Everyone else in the class seemed to be stuck on it as well. Harry glanced at it again.
What does it mean? I dont get it, thought Harry to himself. Even though he had been through other riddles before (once in his first year, and last year), he just couldnt seem to make sense of this one.
I must be tired from the other tests, said Harry to himself. I cant think straight. Well, lets see here. Ill break it down. Maybe each paragraph is describing an individual ingredient.
So, hmm what is a word used when declaring something is? Oh, I got to think back to my years a Muggle school what was the infinitive form of the verb is? Ah yes! To be! So, it is be. And the other part, oh, he gives it to us, piz but I dont know any ingredients that start with bepiz. Oh well, how about the last clue? A word that a baby says. That ones easy! Ga! All babies say ga ga. So, bepizga? No, thats not it oh! Begapiz! Thats a very common ingredient. I think it makes stuff stronger
Amazed and happy with himself for figuring out he first ingredient, Harry quickly moved onto the second.
Whats something you would find in your hair, under a car, and inside a fair? Hmm maybe theyre not all connected like that, though. Maybe each one is describing a part of the word, like before! Okay, whats something you may find in your hair?
Harry scanned the room, looking for any sign of what someone would wear in their hair. Then, when he got to Lavender, he saw it. A bandana. She was wearing a pink one in her hair. Maybe that was it.
Alright! Next part under a car? Well, Uncle Vernon never repaired the car himself, much less allowed me to learn anything about them. So, Im kind of stuck here unless. Well, I know that the motor of a car is in the front, and I think part of it goes under the car as well, so Im going to say motor for this part of the clue 
Bandanamotor? That doesnt sound correct.
Oh well, Ill think about that later! Now, whats something Id find in a fair? Im assuming he means a carnival, of course. So a Ferris wheel? No. A merry-go-round? No. smelly popcorn everywhere? No arg! What could it be?
Well, maybe it doesnt mean a carnival maybe it means a different kind of fair like impartialness! Justice! Okay, what is inside those ideas? Well, nothing really makes them up since they are not real. So a person I guess says them. But what kind of person is impartial and nice? Wait! Thats it! Nice! Nice is the word. Niceness makes up fairness.
Alright! So, Bandanamotornice? No, thats cant be right. I must have gotten one of them wrong but which one? Hmm nice? No, thats right. Motor? Well, I did just guess on that one? Bandana? Well, what else are you going to wear in your-
Harry looked over and aw, sitting next to Lavender, Parvati. She was wearing a bow in her hair.
Thats it! A bow, not a bandana! Alright, Bomotornice. That sounds familiar oh yeah! Thats one of the three legendary ingredients I read about last night! Lets see, there was Bomotornice, Havomotornice, and Gomotornice. I think Bomotornice is a powerful, but much safer version of unicorn blood. Thank goodness I read that last night, we didnt learn anything about that this year in class.
Excited from figuring out the second clue, Harry went onto the next and last one.
The god of gold? Where did I hear that before, it sounds so familiar Harry closed his eyes, and tried to retrace his life, day by day. No, he hadnt heard it in school it was before school started. Then it hit him.
Thank you Sirius! Harry said to himself. So this makes how many times youve helped me? Harry remembered that Harry had read in the newspaper, while at Mrs. Figgs house, the god of gold it was the Sorcerers Stone, a stone that gave immortality and infinite wealth.
Alright! yelled Harry in his brain, Ive got the three ingredients: Begapiz, Bomotornice, and a Sorcerers Stone now what potion do those three make?
Harry sat there, stroking his chin, and watched the others work all around him. It seemed that everyone was having trouble with it, except for Malfoy it appeared. He just loomed over his paper and was writing all over it. Occasionally, Harry saw Crabbe or Goyle try and peek on Malfoys paper for the answer, but they were far too slow and stupid. Malfoy just hit them in the face whenever they tried to cheat off his paper. Seeing they would never get any answers from him, Crabbe and Goyle turned their heads toward Tcis paper. He didnt seem to be having to much pitifully with it either.
Well, lets see, said Harry to himself, The Begapiz will enhance the power of the Bomotornice and the Sorcerers Stone. So, the enhanced Bomotornice will react with the Sorcerers Stone resulting in what? Well, some sort of very powerful life potion, possibly able to bring people back to life but no, no potion can do that. Maybe, it will make someone powerful enough to become a god practically. Who knows that the new powers the Begapiz will give the Sorcerers Stone and the Bomotornice will definitely make the person at least almost immortal
Wait! Thats it! Ive read about this potion before! The Almost Immortal Potion! I read that it has never been made, since every time one person gets one ingredient, and they go searching for another, they have mysteriously died. Yes! Thats it!
Harry quickly wrote down the name of the potion on the small sheet of paper, along with the names of the three ingredients. He scribbled a short description of what the potion did, and the second he lifted his pencil off the paper, the bell rang, signaling the end of the test.
Time is up! yelled Professor Snape. He prowled the desks, yanking the tests away from everyone, not even looking at them. 
Go away, now, he said when he had collected them all. The class immediately started to file out. Harry, however, decided to talk to Malfoy a bit before leaving.
So, Malfoy, did you get the Advanced O.W.L.? Malfoy picked up his books, and turned his head towards Harry. At first, he gave him a hard stare, but then, he smiled at him.
Of course I did, he said, with you yelling the answer in your head so loud, its a wonder the rest of the class didnt hear you. Harrys eyes grew wide, and he went cold. 
You- you heard me thinking? Malfoy zipped up his backpack, and threw it over his shoulder.
Well yeah, he said, in a duh tone of voice. Didnt you learn anything from our duel? All Animagi are connected some more so than others I guess. Weasley and Granger didnt look like they were having the easiest time in the world on that exam.
Harry just stared at Malfoy as he got up, and walked to the door.
But, I mean, you looked like you were getting it, but it still looked as though something was troubling you I thought it was because you didnt have the answer.
Malfoy stopped right in his tracks, a few inches from the door. He spun around, and his face met Harrys eyes.
Do you really want to know whats troubling me, Potter? he asked. Harry folded his arms and smirked.
Well, I know what it is now: me beating you two times in a row. 
Malfoy shook his head.
Potter, I do have a life outside of you. No, while those two defeats have hurt me considerably, thats not what has been worrying me. Believe it or not, Potter, what has been worrying me is you.
I knew it, because I beat you! said Harry, trying to rub it in more.
No you idiot, said Malfoy bitterly. This has nothing to do with dueling or Quidditch. This has to do with your mom. Harry gave a look of confusion. Was this another one of Malfoys insults coming up, or was he serious? But, how could he know about what Harry was planning to do?
What about her? asked Harry. Shes still dead, isnt she?
Well, thats just it, whispered Malfoy, coming in closer. I really dont know. Now, Im not going t say how I got this information, but I think Voldemorts planning something, and it involves her somehow.
What was Malfoy up to? Sure, his family had always been on Voldemorts side, and he probably let out all his plans to them during meetings, but why was Malfoy telling him this? He had to know before he took him seriously.
Why are you telling me this? asked Harry, trying to look serious. Malfoy did something surprising. He walked up to Harry, and put his cold hand on Harrys shoulder. At first, Harry thought he was going to shudder.
Harry, said Malfoy. This surprised Harry, Malfoy never referred to him by his first name. Youre like well, let me just say this. If Ive learned one thing my entire life, its that having a good enemy is more valuable than having a good friend. Enemies they give you someone to focus everything on: hatred, anger, things you could never do to your friends unless you wanted to lose them. And, well, I dont want to lose you as an enemy, Potter.
As weird and perverse a comment that was, it touched Harry. And, the more he thought about it, the more he couldnt help the thought that if Malfoy ever died, hed feel terrible. Malfoy must have felt the same way. 
Thanks, Draco, said Harry. Malfoy winced.
No. Okay, lets stop this, he growled. He ripped his hand off of Harry shoulder, and rubbed it on his pants. Just just be careful Potter. And with that, he walked out of the room. Harry began walking out, to catch up with Hermione and Ron, when Professor Snape called to him.
Potter! he yelled. Harry sighed and turned around. What was he going to do now? Take another ten points off from Gryffindor for taking too long to leave?
Excellent job on the Advanced O.W.L. test. Thirty-five points to Gryffindor. 
Harry nearly fell over. What was he doing? He never gave points to Gryffindor! Then, Harry thought, the thirty-five points he was giving them now would make up for the thirty-five they had lost at the beginning of class. 
Now dont make me take away those points again! said Professor Snape. Youre going to be late for dinner! Go along!
Harry smiled, and ran out of the room. He didnt stop running until he got to the Great Hall that was filled with all seventh years and fifth years, taking a dinner break from their exams before their last two. Harry sat down, next to Ron and Hermione, who were both already busy eating. 
Harry couldnt believe it. So far this year, his three worst enemies were becoming three good friends. First Dudley, then Malfoy, even though they were enemies, and now Snape. All this happiness flowing through Harry mad him almost forget that today was the day of the O.W.L.s, and made him not hear the bell, signaling the end of dinner, and the beginning of their next exam, and the one they were most looking forward to: Care of Magical Creatures. 
As Harry walked down to grounds near Hagrids hut, he saw many other students walking down there whom he didnt recognize. 
Umm, are you sure youre in this class? Harry asked two first year Gryffindors. Harry recognized them as Akshay and Joe.
Oh, me? No Mr. Potter! squeaked Akshay. I heard that the Ravenclaws and Hufflepuffs test was awesome, and I dont want to miss this one!
And I heard theyre going to be playing some Vanilla Ice! said Joe, moving his hips around in a circle. Akshay grabbed a hold of him.
Joe, youre so weird, he said. As they ran off, and Harry thought he heard Akshay randomly yell Linux or something.
Man, that kid needs help, said Ron.
Akshay comes from a family of computer programmers, said Hermione. Hes used to things going logically, not spontaneous magic. He finds it very exciting, more so than the other first years.
What, do you interview all of the new students Hermione? asked Ron.
Just the ones I think are interesting, she piped. Harry was about to ask her how she determined which students were interesting, but a blinding light appeared in the air. Harry shielded his eyes for a second, then receded them, to see where the illumination was from. Harry saw before him four massive poles, and at the top of each, there was a bright light, revealing an entire stadium in the darkness, right next to Hagrids hut.
The stadium was almost as big as the Quidditch field, but not as high. At one end it was blue, and on the other it was red. Protruding from either end of the stadium was a small clear box, large enough for one person to fit in. All around the stadium, there were bleachers, on which several underclass students and sixth years were already seated on. Suddenly, Hagrid came running up to Harry, Ron, and Hermione. 
Hagrid, said Harry, whats all this for? Hagrid clapped his hands together, and rubbed them. He had a slightly insane look in his face.
Its fer yer test Arry! he belched, as if it was the most obvious thing in the world. I though we coul let th res of th school watch.
Sounds like a good idea Hagrid, said Harry. It should be fun.
Thas wha Im hopin.
But, what about our Average O.W.L. test? asked Hermione.
Oh, yall can pass tha silly exam easily enough, said Hagrid, shrugging it off. Im not gonna give it ter yeh. Besides, the Advanced O.W.L. test will definitely take th entire two hours.
Whatever you say Hagrid, said Harry, thankful that he could rest his wrists for a while before his last test. 
Now I gotta go an do th announcements, said Hagrid, running off to the stadium. Harry, Ron, and Hermione went over to the bleachers with the rest of their class, eager to watch as well. 
Ladies an gentlemen, boomed Hagrids voice from the center of the stadium, welcome to the test for the Advanced Care of Magical Creatures O.W.L.!
There was quite a bit of applause, and Harry was surprised to see that the bleachers were completely full, even with a few teachers here and there. Some of the younger students were asleep, their heads on their friends. Harry pointed them out to Ron who couldnt help but laugh.
Well, it is late isnt it? said Hermione in her famous matter-of-factly voice. Now that Harry thought about it, it was very late, the latest they had ever officially been in class. Harry looked at his watch, and saw that it was just a little past ten o clock. The extremely bright lights must have made him forget that it was so late.
Ill be doin this tes like they did fer th Duelin Club, said Hagrid again. Out of th eleven students here, I will draw ther names ou of this hat two at a time. Th two tha I draw will battle ther dragons, an th winners name will stay in th hat, and the losers will not go back in. Th las five names in th hat will get th Advanced O.W.L.
Now, therell be no commentating on this test, so as not to scare th dragons. So, youll hafta watch very well to see whas goin on. Now, fer th names! He reached into his large tattered hat, and drew two pieces of parchemnt out. Our firs pair of well dragon fighters are Arry Potter, an Vincen Crabbe!
Harry, full of adrenaline and nervousness, jumped up from his seat, and ran the short distance to the box on the red side of the arena. The view from the box was quite different from the bleachers. Since it was clear on all sides, Harry felt as though he were floating in air, right above the grassy stadium. From here, it looked much higher up.
Harry could also see Crabbe, directly across the arena from him. He didnt look nearly as confident as Harry. He looked wiped out from the tests, and his skin was totally white.
An now presentin th dragons! yelled Hagrid, who was now outside of the stadium, and in the middle of the bleachers. Loud and fast music started playing, and Harry looked down, and saw two dark circles appear on either side of the arena. Out each hole, a dragon popped out. 
Harrys Hungarian Horntail was looking extremely vicious, being the height of the stadium. Its teeth were bulging out of its mouth, and liquid fire was pouring out through the space between them. Its skin was a healthy shade of dark red, and the spikes shooting out of its leathery skin were all jet black. It let out a massive roar that thundered throughout the arena.
Crabbes dragon, on the other hand, was a Canadian Crawler. It was about half the size of Harrys Hungarian Horntail, and it was a light blue color all over, except for its green head. It gave a small screech, nothing compared to Harrys dragons roar.
Hearing Crabbes dragons noise, Harrys dragon turned its head over to see Crabbes. It glared down at the Canadian Crawler, and blew smoke out of its nostrils. Crabbes dragon looked up at it, and spun around. The two dragons were now face to face, and the battle had begun. The winner would be decided by the previous training each of them had given their dragon. Harry had trained his dragon every day during class, even named him Woodworm. But Crabbe, who had slacked off and played around, gave his dragon the disadvantage.
And theyre off! yelled Hagrid. Harrys dragon shot up into the air, not taking its eyes off of Crabbes dragon, and then breathed a massive fireball right at it. Now remember! When I say ter stop, you got to stop, an th duel s over!
Run! yelled Crabbe as loud as he could, pressing his face up against the wall of the box. But, his dragon didnt move. Crabbe looked as though he wished he had spent more time training his dragon. It started scratching its neck with its short leg, and giving off some sort of loud purring noise. 
The fireball hit it right in its chest and knocked it backwards. It looked extremely surprised, and roared when its back hit the ground, causing a small earthquake. 
Come on Woodworm! Slash him up! yelled Harry. Just like Harry had trained it to do, Woodworm gave him a thumbs up, and did as he was told. He squatted down, and then jumped high into the air, landing right on Crabbes dragon. He put his legs across Crabbes dragons stomach, it took one long arm, and pushed Crabbes dragons head down to the ground, and started slashing with its other free arm. Crabbes dragon was howling more and more with every slash. It tried in vain to push Woodworm off, but the more it pushed, the more it got slashed. Eventually, it just gave up.
Stop th fight! yelled Hagrid. These words seemed to have a magically effect on the dragons as they both froze in the positions they were in, and the black holes appeared back in the ground below them. The dragons simply disappeared. Arry Potter is th winner! Harry smiled, and ran back to his seat, amid much cheering from the tired crowd.
So far so good, he said to Ron and Hermione.
Man, Harry, said Ron, you slaughtered Crabbes dragon! He didnt even put up a fight compared to yours!
Well, I guess I trained mine well, said Harry. Either that, or Crabbe just did a really terrible job with his.
Shh! said Hermione. Hagrids announcing the next pair!
-nex duel is Miss. Pansy Parkinson and Miss. Hermione Granger!
Hermione skipped to the red box, same as Harry, trying to look happy. However, she looked quite nervous, not being used to performing in front of a very large audience like Harry and Ron were, from playing Quidditch. Pansy Parkinson, a Slytherin girl, looked right at home up in her blue box. 
Once again, the dragons rose out from the ground from below. Hermiones Transylvanian Three-Headed Terror looked even more ferocious than Woodworm did. All three of its heads were nothing more than some space for its massive teeth to take up. Its body was a dark green, and the silvery spikes protruding from every inch of its hide made it look even more devastating. The things that really made this dragon special, though, was its tail. The tail, at first glance, looked like the most harmless part of the dragons body, unless you looked at the tip. It was a small hole that had several small spikes surrounding it. It wasnt the spikes that was intimidating, thought, it was the acid pouring out of the hole. It constantly bubbled out, like some sort of horrible fountain. Since the dragons hide was so thick and strong, it didnt hurt itself, but the acid would sear a hole right though anything else.
Pansys little Mexican Muncher looked like some sort of pathetic joke next to Hermiones terror. It was about one fourth of Hermiones dragons size (due to Pansys poor care), and it was a light brown. All of its claws were dull, and it only had two small teeth that looked chipped. All in all, it didnt stand a chance.
Use your acid, Sacrenfer! yelled Hermione. She, like Harry and Ron did, named her dragon as well, to make commands easier. Sacrenfer immediately spun around, and shot its tail into the air. A fountain of bubbling green acid came pouring out of the tip. It flew through the air at a high speed, and landed right on Pansys dragon. Her dragon let out a loud roar as white smoke started forming where the acid had hit its skin. The hide of her dragon was beginning to bubble from the acids reaction as well. 
Um do something? said Pansy, looking quite bewildered. Her dragon gave her one quick, confused look, and then collapsed to the ground, smoke still pouring off of its skin. 
Hermiones the winna! yelled Hagrid. There was a lot of applause as people woke up from resting their eyes on the bleachers. Harry and Ron, however, didnt stop clapping until Hermione had returned to her seat next to them.
Why are you applauding so much? she asked. That battle was far easier done than said!
It doesnt matter, said Ron, just stopping his clapping. Whether you had a great victory, a pathetic victory, or even lost, wed applaud just the same! Harry gave him a smile and nod of approval, and Hermione smiled.
Thanks guys, she said as she sat down. 
Aight! Aight! said Hagrid, trying to calm down the excited crowd. Our nex battle s gonna be between Mr. Gregory Goyle an Mr. Ron Weasley!
The audience gave an enthusiastic cheer as the two competitors walked to their boxes. This time, Ron took the blue box, and Goyle took the red one. Immediately, the two holes in the ground appeared, and the dragons popped out.
Where are the dragons coming from? Harry asked Hermione. They seem to just pop out of the ground.
Well, said Hermione, the chamber that they were kept in was just below the ground here, so its pretty easy to just make some holes appear in their ceiling, and then force them up through it.
Id hate to be part of the crew that had to force the dragons through the holes, said Harry. Man, what did they do to deserve that? 
But, Harry and Hermiones attention had now turned to the two dragons that popped out of the ground. Goyles was the best dragon of the Slyhtherins so far. He had a Golden Germanic Glider, and it looked quite elegant. It was at least forty feet long, and extremely slender, like a snake. Its entire body was a light golden color, and it looked quite ferocious. 
Just by looking at Rons dragon, you would think that Goyles victory was in the bag. His dragon was extremely fat, the size of several elephants, only with no muscle. Its torso was so incredibly large, that it appeared as though it had no limbs. Its neck barely popped out of the top of its giant bulge, and the dragons orange, black, yellow and purple stripes did not give it any more of a ferocious appearance. 
All the time Ron was training it, though, he kept reminding himself of the special power that Hagrid had spoke of; the power that all African Abysmalls had, only no one had ever bothered to raise it enough to try and discover what it was exactly. 
Come on Tapescrew! yelled Ron. Lets see what you got! Tapescrew looked at Ron, appearing slightly confused as to what was going on. It spun its head back around, and saw Goyles dragon. It glared its eyes at it, and gave a deep roar.
Goyles dragon, however, didnt try to intimidate Tapescrew. It decided to attack immediately. It jumped up into the air, and hovered there, looking quite magnificent. It stiffed itself up, into one extremely long form, and started spinning. The dragon then shot forward through the air, like a bullet right at Tapescrew. It hit him, bouncing right off, but not before causing it extreme pain.
Tapescrew let out another roar, this time, there was a hint of pain in it. Goyles dragon then went back into its normal, hovering form, and shot backwards, out of the way of danger. Tapescrew tried to make a grab for it, but missed and fell over.
Come on Tapescrew! yelled Ron again. Get up and use your weight! Tapescrew immediately jumped up, surprising the crowd. Its tiny wings fluttered, and it slowly rose into the air. When it was just above the height of the box, it stopped fluttering its wings, and fell to the ground, causing a massive earthquake. The entire stadium shook from the force of its immense weight, and even the bleaches vibrated. 
Goyles dragon, however, was unaffected by it. It was in the air, and the earthquake didnt even phase it. It just reared back, and shot a giant fireball from its mouth, straight at Tapescrew who was lying on the ground, collapsed from its previous attack. The fireball struck it, right in the face. Fire sprang up all around its head, and Tapescrew started scrambling around, shooting fire all over. 
The fire, however, was not a reddish color, it was a golden instead. It got brighter and brighter, and began to expand, not coming just from Tapescrews mouth, but from all over its body. It stopped scrambling around now, and just stood there, giving off its heavenly glow, looking completely oblivious to everything.
Then, it happened. It looked like a snake that was shedding its skin, only much faster, and much larger. Tapescrews multicolored skin just fell off. It was a very odd sight. Harry expected to see the insides of the dragon, its guts and blood, come flowing out all over. But, to his surprise, there were no bodily fluids anywhere to be seen. All that there was, standing on the massive flesh of the previous dragon, was a giant, blue orb. It looked like a massive rubber band ball, all coiled up. Then, it gave off a dazzling glow, and started to unfold. Very slowly at first, then faster and faster, it uncoiled, revealing an extremely long and thick thing.
The thing brought its head up, and gave out a roar, even though it had no visible mouth. But, that was about to change. All over, scales began to form, each with its own small spike. Its head grew a mouth, a giant mouth, with teeth all inside it. Two red eyes popped up above its massive mouth, along with several white horns. Then, it suddenly burst into flames. A blue inferno covered its entire now golden body. It was a sight to behold.
That must be the secret power of the Abysmall, whispered Hermione to Harry, looking just as amazed as the rest of the audience. After just a few fights, it must become powerful enough to be able to shed its skin and reveal its true power! This is amazing!
Ron, who was now jumping up and down with delight, decided to try out his new dragon with an attack.
Alright Tapescrew! he yelled. Lets see what you got! The new and improved Tapescrew appeared to have heard him, for he brought his head back, and opened his mouth wider. As he was doing this, the already dark sky above the stadium started filling up with clouds. Tapescrew gave not a roar, but an ear piercing shriek that forced the entire audience to cover their ears. As soon as the sound left its mouth, there was a clap of lightning, and an explosion of thunder that literally set the clouds ablaze.
He lit th sky on fire! yelled Hagrid, his voice sounding like a mix of nervousness and excitement. Everyone was looking up at the clouds, which were now floating infernos.
Tapescrew gave another yell, and a fiery blast of lightning came down from the sky, and right in the middle of the stadium. A second later, a flaming tornado appeared right where the lightning had struck. It shot off chunks of fire every time it spun, that flew all over, including right at the audience.
Kooverta Maximus! came a voice from right next to Harry. He looked over and saw that there was a full grown wizard right there. His spell shot right up above the stadium, and collided with three other shield spells, coming from each corner of the arena, apparently cast by other wizards. The combined four shields multiplied their power, and an enormous shield formed over the arena, separating it from the audience, just in time to block off the chunks of fire that were flying all over. 
An thanks ter th volunteer wizards who I ha put here in case summat like that happened, said Hagrid. Apparently, he had expected something like that to happen, a dragon to get out of control, or use a too powerful of an attack. 
The tornado was now twice its original size, and the sound it was making was deafening. Even though Tapescrew didnt seem to be having any trouble escaping its mighty pulling force, Goyles dragon looked as though it was using all the strength it had to resist being sucked in. But, not even a dragon can put off the inevitable too long and, when the tornado was about four times its original size, the dragon could resist no longer. With a low yelp, it gave into the amazing force of the tornado, a began spinning around it, faster and faster, until it ended up right in the middle of it, being burned to a crisp. 
Stop th figh! Stop th figh! yelled Hagrid, trying to end the contest before Goyles dragon was killed. 
The thunderclouds disappeared, as did the fiery tornado, instantly. All that was left was the awesome new Tapescrew and a pile of ash that had been Goyles dragon. Tapescrew and the pile of dust were both lowered into the ground, to be stored away. 
Th winna is Ron Weasley! bellowed Hagrid, trying not to sound to happy over the death of Goyles dragon. Ron came bounding back to his seat, looking more excited than Ron or Hermione had ever seen him. 
Did you see him? Wasnt he awesome? Oh man that was great! he garbled, looking as if he was in a state of excited shock over winning the duel. 
You did great, said Harry, trying to calm him down.
Oh man, that was- oh thanks Harry, said Ron, beginning to return to his senses.
You know, Ron, said Hermione, you just made history with that last fight. No ones ever seen what an African Abysmall can become with enough training. Its the only dragon in the world that metamorphosizes, and youre the owner of the only adult form of an Abysmall. Ron began to stroke his chin.
Hmm I wonder how much I could sell one of them for? he said, looking dazed. Harry and Hermione laughed, leaving Ron to his dream. 
It went on like that for several minutes: Dean fought Parvati, she won of course; and Seamus fought Lavender who he surprisingly defeated. Harry couldnt wait for the next fight to begin. This was the most fun hed ever had taking a test. 
An for our nex match, well have Mr. Seamus Finnigan against Mr. Ron Weasley! An, Mr. Weasley, please try an not ter kill th opposing dragon this time, okay?
Alright Hagrid, Ill try but Im not making any promises! yelled Ron, who was already in his box, ready to go. His African Abysmall and Seamus Welsh Green appeared from beneath the ground, and immediately got at it. This time, Rons dragon gave off some sort of mystifying glow, that hypnotized Seamus dragon. It wrapped itself around the small Welsh Green, and squeezed it into unconsciousness, ending the battle almost as soon as it had started.
That was almost too easy, said Ron when he had arrived back in his seat. They should really have trained better. My Tapescrew just barely touched him and poof! He was gone. 
Harry began to get nervous. He was probably going to have to face Ron eventually what if he lost? It would be the first time either of them would have ever directly gone against one another in a contest, and whoever came out the better may be proclaimed greater than the other for the rest of their lives. This could be a bad situation.
Miss Hermione Granga an Miss Parvati Patil! Yer up! said Hagrid when the two dragons had gone back underground. Hermione got up from her seat, and walked over to her box. Everyone was by now used to the rhythm of how a match goes, so the fights were going much faster. Hermiones Transylvanian Three-Headed Terror and Parvatis green and red Irish Igniter rose from the ground, and immediately got at it, not even waiting for commands from their owners. 
Hermiones dragon was much larger than Parvatis, so she had the advantage. Two of its heads went around Parvatis dragon, and squeezed it, leaving the third head open to begin breathing some flames, which is exactly what it did.
Thats the way Sacrenfer! yelled Hermione, jumping up and down. Parvatis dragon was now covered in flames, and Hermiones was just squeezing it harder and harder, not making matters any better for Parvati. Within just a few more seconds, the match was over, and Hermione had won. Parvatis dragon, when Sacrenfer released it, collapsed to the ground, still on fire. The two dragons were brought back underground. 
Now Mr. Draco Malfoy and Miss Hermione Granga again! said Hagrid.
Parvati and Malfoy exchanged places, and Hermione stayed right where she was. Malfoy had an evil smirk on his face that appeared to not make Hermione feel much better, though she looked plenty confident by now.
It doesnt matter if he tries to psyche her out or not, said Ron. Even if he does win, Hermione will still get the Advanced O.W.L.
She will? asked Harry.
Well, yeah. Remember? The top five get the Advanced O.W.L. Right now, theres only you, me, Hermione, Malfoy, and Tci left. All five of us are going to get the O.W.L. no matter what.
Tci gets it even though he hasnt even fought yet? said Harry, amazed.
I guess so, he just must be very lucky. But, enough talk. The match is starting! Harry immediately turned his attention to the arena, where the two dragons were rushing at each other. They were almost the same size, but Malfoys appeared to be slightly larger. This would not be much of an advantage, though, the dragons were so huge already that a few extra inches wouldnt really matter. 
Just do what you did before Sacrenfer! yelled Hermione. On command, Sacrenfer put the two heads on the left and right sides down so that they were parallel to the ground, ready to wrap around the opponent. The middle head reared back, powering up a fireball.
Do it now, Tresmal! yelled Malfoy. Evidently, he had named his dragon as well. When the words left his mouth, Tresmal immediately stopped right where it was, spun around, so its back was towards Sacrenfer, and exposed all of its deadly spikes. Sacrenfer was going to run right into them.
No! Stop! yelled Hermione. But, it was too late. Malfoy had timed it just right, and Sacrenfer ran right into the spiky bed that was Tresmals back. Each of its three heads let out a giant roar of pain that echoed throughout the entire grounds of Hogwarts and probably all the way into the castle. Sacrenfer had been defeated. Its heads drooped down towards the ground, and its eyes closed.
I lost said Hermione, who had fallen onto her knees in the box. Tresmal was now shaking its back, trying to get Sacrenfers body off. With one massive spasm, Sacrenfers body came flying off, and landed right in front of Hermiones box. She looked at it, burst into tears, and ran away. The two dragons were brought underground, and Malfoy returned to his seat, singing and whistling. 
Whats her problem? asked Ron, pointing at Hermione who was now almost all the way back to the castle. She knew she was going to get the O.W.L. anyway.
You know how much she likes to be the best at things, Ron, said Harry. And losing something this important, that quickly it must have really gotten to her.
Yeah, I guess so.
Fer out nex match! yelled Hagrid, quite loudly, to take peoples attention away from Hermione, we will have Mr. um, Sy? Tci is it? Yes, Mr. Tci an Mr. Draco Malfoy!
Harry groaned. While he would like to see Tcis dragon in action, he wanted to get back into the arena and fight. 
The two dragons rose from the ground, and Harry examined Tcis Mongolian Mutilator. It was quite small, only about half the size of Malfoys Hungarian Horntail. But, it did have one very interesting feature. Instead of having spikes all over, it had several metallic tubes, including two large ones at the top of its head. While they looked next to useless, Harry imagined they must have some special purpose.
Malfoy, who looked quite irritated by having to have fought twice in a row, immediately began ordering his massive dragon.
Tresmal just, step on it or something, he said lazily. Evidently, he didnt think Tcis dragon would be much of a problem since it was so small. Tresmal walked up to Tcis dragon, and peered down at it. It raised one giant hand into the air, and started bringing it down right on top of it.
Then, just when it looked as though Tcis dragon was going to be crushed, it put its tubes to work. Huge flames came shooting out of each one, flying miles into the sky. Some of the flames hit Tresmal, causing its hide to light on fire. 
No! Put yourself out Tresmal! yelled Malfoy, pressed up against the glass side of his box. Tresmal immediacy began whacking the flames with his hands, but it wasnt doing anything, the flames were still spreading. 
Tcis dragon then shot another round of fire at Tresmal, this time, perfectly aimed right at it. Any part of the dragon that wasnt on fire before was now. It just looked like one giant inferno. Within seconds, it collapsed onto the ground, defeated.
NOO! yelled Malfoy. How could I lose!? The two dragons were brought back underground, and Malfoy walked back to his seat, trying not to looked too angry about the outcome of the match. Tci ran after him, trying to shake hands, but Malfoy would have none of it. He just sat down and looked away from his fellow Slytherins.
Wow, said Ron, I never thought anything could ever beat Malfoys dragon. Tci must be an awesome trainer.
What are you talking about? said Harry. Youre dragon could beat Tci with its eyes closed.
I dont know, Harry. Did you see the flames it made? Thats was pretty awesome.
Harry had to agree. Tcis dragon was very impressive, he felt sorry for the person that would go against him next. 
Aight everyone, said Hagrid. Weve ony got a alf hour left, so we got ter hurry! Th nex match is wow, Mr. Tci again and Mr. Arry Potter!
Harry fell back into his seat. Why did he have to say that? He was going to be defeated by Tci great. He walked up to his box and sighed. Well, he thought to himself, at least now he wouldnt have to face Ron. The dragons rose from the ground, and Harry felt even less confident when he saw Tcis dragon. It looked the same as before, but now he knew its hidden power: shooting mile-high flames from its tubes
Then it hit Harry. He knew how he could win this match!
Woodworm! yelled Harry. Pick up a chunk of the ground! Woodworm turned around and gave him a confused expression, but did the task anyway. He bent over, and picked up a large piece of earth. 
Now put it in your mouth! said Harry, trying not to laugh at his own command. Woodworm threw it high into the air, and caught it in its mouth, not daring to swallow it. He looked very funny, like a hamster with its cheeks full of food. 
Spit it out! At the other dragon! yelled Harry, hoping his plan would work. Wanting to spit it out anyway, Woodworm opened his mouth, and several chunks of flaming dirt came flying out, right at Tcis dragon. 
Just as Harry had planned, the dirt broke into smaller pieces while in the air, and several of those pieces lodged themselves into Tcis dragons tubes. More and more dirt settled inside them, not allowing any fire to come out.
Ha! Id like to see you shoot fire now! yelled Harry. All of its tubes were overflowing with molten dirt, and the dragon was rendered useless. No matter how hard it tried, or how much energy and effort it put into it, no fire would come out. 
Excellent! Now, Woodworm, attack it! Woodworm ran up to Tcis dragon, stood there for a second, and then kicked it right in the stomach, making it fly through the air, and hit Tcis box. Harry saw its eyes roll back, and its body go limp. It fell down to the ground, unconscious. Harry had won, he had beaten Tcis dragon.
Harry skipped back down to his seat, and sat down next to Ron. After much congratulations from him, they both looked back at Hagrid, who was ready to announce the final match, the one Harry had dreaded even more than his one with Tci.
Th last two competitors, Arry Potter an Ron Weasley, are you ready?
Harry and Ron stared at each other. He had totally forgotten that since he had beaten Tci, he would now have to fight Ron. What he had dreaded the last few minutes, and the entire year, ever since the Dueling Club had started, how now come true. He and Ron, for the first time, would have to go against each other. 


Chapter 28- Harrys Order
Well, good luck, whispered Harry. Ron just nodded back. The two of them walked up to the arena, taking their positions. 
This should be good, Harry heard Malfoy snicker. Evidently, he was over his loss, and was eager to cheer against both of them. 
Lets try an keep this a fast match, said Hagrid. Weve ony got about ten minutes left. The two dragons rose from the ground and faced each other. Harry swallowed hard, and began the fight.
Alright Woodworm, take him out, he said quite unenthusiastically. Woodworm ran towards Tapescrew, who was still giving off the golden aura and blue fire. Ron mumbled something, and Tapescrew rose from the ground, flying very high into the air, showing off all of its body. 
Lets take this battle to the air, Woodworm! yelled Harry, starting to feel more confident about fighting his friend. Woodworm jumped into the air and rose to the height that Tapescrew was at. 
Shoot some fire Tapescrew, and watch out for its tail! yelled Harry. Tapsecrew was already trying to coil itself around Woodworm. 
Woodworm reared back slightly, and let loose a giant ball of fire right at Tapescrew. It was a massive fireball, and it was flying right towards Tapescrews face. Harry was getting excited, there was nothing Ron could do to stop it now.
Then, just as the fireball was about to hit its face, something amazing happened. Tapescrew opened its mouth, as if to breath fire, but no fire came out just water. Hundreds of thousands of gallons came shooting out, right at the flame that was heading for it, immediately putting it out, and reducing it to nothing more than some smoke. Harry just stared, dumbfounded. Whoever heard of a water-breathing dragon?
It was now Tapescrews turn to attack. It shot right at Woodworm, at speeds faster than Harry could have imagined. Then, when it looked as thought it were going to collide with Woodworm, something even more amazing happened: it went through Woodworm. Half of it was sticking out of Woodworms back, and the other half was sticking out its front. Woodworm, however, didnt appear to be in any pain; he just closed his eyes, and appeared to have fallen asleep. This was very odd sight, seeing two dragons connected like this, and it brought many gasps from the audience.
Tapescrew then just continued going through Woodworm, until he had passed through him entirely, and was all on one side. This, however, was not good for Woodworm, as he was still asleep. Since he was unconscious in the air, he could do only one thing: fall. 
He fell from high in the sky all the way down to the ground, creating a massive explosion sound, along with a small earthquake that shook the entire audience and stadium. Woodworm gave a low, painful growl and stuck his tongue out, indicating that he was done fighting, and that Harry had lost.
Lets hear it fer th winna Mr. Ron Weasley an his dragon Tapescrew! yelled Hagrid. The audience erupted into applause as Ron walked back to his seat, bowing and blowing kisses to everyone. Clearly, he was enjoying the attention. Harry tried to feel happy for him, he rarely ever got praise like this he deserved it.
Harry walked back to his seat, and waited for Ron. He wanted to congratulate him as well. Just as he saw Ron emerging from his throng of admirers, the bell rang, signaling it was time to start their last class of the day. Harry saw Ron disappear back into the group as he headed for his next test. Harry decided he would just congratulate him during their next O.W.L., during Divination.
Harry shuddered. It was time for his Divination O.W.L., and he couldnt imagine a worse torture than that. He was tired, hungry, his brain felt like mush, and he wouldnt be the least bit surprised if his hands exploded from cramps. He really didnt feel like taking another test. 
But, he somehow made it to the top of the tower, and climbed into the Divination room. Harry saw that everyone else was already there, including Ron. Harry walked over to his desk, and collapsed into it.
Hey, great game, he said to Ron.
Thanks, he said back. I had no clue I was going to win.
You deserved it, said Harry. Training your dragon, even though it looked like it was never going to be any good. You stuck with it, and you prevailed.
Thanks, Harry. Youre a real pal. 
Just then, Professor Trelawney popped into the room, holding a large amount of papers. She immediately began passing them out. 
Now, she began in her usual, misty voice, even though I already know the outcome of these tests, and who will and wont get the O.W.L., I have decided to have you take them anyway for practice.
Harry and Ron rolled their eyes. 
And even though I rarely ever choose to speak what I have seen, she said, looking at Ron and Harry, sounding annoyed, I must say, you two will not do very well.
Hey, she finally made an accurate prediction, whispered Ron to Harry after she had given them their tests. Harry laughed, and began working. Just a few minutes into the exam, his hand began to hurt. He had already done six other tests, just like this, and his hand felt as though it had just run the marathon twice. Worst of all, all of the questions were short answer; she gave a few occurrences, and you had to write what they meant. Harry knew barely any of them, and guessed on almost them all. He didnt really care if he did or didnt get the O.W.L. anymore, all he wanted was sleep.
However, the sounds of another Advanced Care of Magical Creatures O.W.L. going on outside encouraged Harry to keep going. He wished he was back out there, fighting with his dragon. 
Before long, Harry had finished, and passed his test in well before anyone else. They were all trying to put down correct answers, not making stuff up. Ron finished shortly after him, then the rest of the class finished, ending with Lavender and Parvati, who had evidently taken their time. 
Professor Trelawney collected the papers and put them away. Harry groaned, it was time for the Advanced O.W.L. test should he try for it?
Well, since this is my last class for the day, said Professor Trelawney, I have decided to end it doing a bit of a more fun test than I did on my other classes.
Harry heard Ron grunt. Though, he agreed with him. What would Professor Trelawneys idea of fun be? Counting the amount of pellets inside an owls stomach to see if it would flood next Tuesday? Harry certainly hoped not.
For the Advanced O.W.L. test, she continued, I am going to show you all a film. It is up to you to try and predict what will happen next. Now, I am warning you, this is a very random movie, and one that I am sure none of you would have ever seen since it is a Muggle film. So, it is going to be next to impossible to figure out what will happen next unless you are a true Seer. She turned away, and walked into the back of her room. She returned with a genuine Muggle television set, VCR and all. It was on a large stand with wheels, so she easily wheeled it to the front of the class.
Excuse me, Professor, said Parvati, but how is that thing going to work? Electricity doesnt work in the castle.
I will power it with a bit of my own magic, she said as she popped the tape into the VCR and tapped it with her wand. Immediately, the TV turned on.
Everyone wishing to participate, please come up close, said Professor Trelawney. Harry sighed, and walked up. Its worth a shot, he thought to himself. Ron came up as well, thinking along the same lines as Harry. Everyone in the class was going to try for it, and they were all huddled around the television set.
I wonder what movie it could be, whispered Ron. Harry shrugged. Knowing Professor Trelawney, it was probably some boring documentary or something. 
Then, the opening credits began and the music started. Harrys ears perked, and his attention turned from outside the window to the TV. Could it be? He looked closer at what was currently on, and felt excited all over. He couldnt believe it she was showing Monty Python and the Holy Grail!
As soon as the opening credits were over, Harry decided it was time to take action. He could get the O.W.L.! Harry closed his eyes, and pretended to shake all over, as if going into some magnificent trance. He slowly walked up next to the television set, and began mumbling incoherent words. Harry heard excited whispers all around him, everyone was wondering what he was doing.
Then, just when the movie was really starting to begin, Harry opened his eyes, and met the world with a blank stare, trying to look as catatonic as possible. Harry had watched this movie so often with Dudley, he had practically memorized it and now was the time to recite it. 
He began speaking right at the first scene, line for line, word for word, with his head tilted slightly to the side, and speaking in a monotone voice. Everyone in the room gawked at him, amazed at what he was doing, actually believing him. While it wasnt hard to deliver the words from the movie, pretending to be in a trance and not laugh or smile was. At many points, especially the funny ones, it took all the self-control Harry had to not explode with laughter. 
It went on like this for several minutes, Harry doing all of the speaking. Except for a few random and inaccurate shots from Parvati and Lavender, he was the only one to have said anything, and he was by far doing the best job. Even if he stopped now, more than halfway through the movie, he would still get the O.W.L. From the looks Professor Trelawney was giving him, he had done the best of any student she had ever seen.
A half hour later, the movie was over, and Harrys Advanced O.W.L. was in the bag. The second the movie ended, Harry pretended to snap out of his catatonic phase by giving a sudden spasm. To add to the effect, Harry collapsed on the floor, as if he had just performed some massively taxing feat. Harry couldnt help but give a small smile as he felt people gather all around him, shaking him and speaking excitedly. To try and avoid any questions they may have about his expression, Harry decided it was time to get up. Harry made a few moans and put his hand to his forehead, acting like he was just coming out of a coma. He had actually pulled it off!
What was it like Harry?
What did you see?
Did voices talk to you?
Were there any buffalos? 
Many questions were thrown at Harry as they helped him up. Professor Trelawney, however, took him aside. She pushed him up against a wall, and immediately began interrogating him.
How did you do that Harry? she asked, sounding amazed. Harry began to feel nervous. Even though Professor Trelawney was not especially good at predicting the future, she probably knew quite a bit about whats really supposed to happen during a true trance. If he told her he saw or heard something that he wasnt supposed to, shed figure out he had faked it.
Then, Harry remembered two years ago, at the end of his third year. Professor Trelawney had gone into a trance, like the one he had faked being in. She had predicted that Wormtail would join forces with Voldemort and resurrect him. Harry remembered that when he questioned her about it afterwards, she didnt remember any of it. Harry decided to follow the same path.
Do do what professor? said Harry, trying to look utterly confused.
You went into a trance my boy! she said. You recited every line to that movie perfectly! Something must have triggered that state of mind, what was it?
I havent a clue professor, said Harry. All I remember is you putting in the movie, seeing the opening credits come up, and then now all of you asking me about what happened.
Professor Trelawney gave him a hard stare, as if she didnt believe him. She opened her mouth, ready to say something when suddenly, the final bell of the day rang, ending the tests.
Sorry professor, said Harry, trying to look innocent, maybe we can talk about this later. Ive really go to go. Harry released himself of her grasp on his shoulder, and shot out of the room with the rest of his classmates. Only Parvati and Lavender questioned Harry anymore, but he managed to throw them off by using the same explanation as he gave Professor Trelawney. Leaving them slightly disappointed, Harry ran up to Ron. 
Oh man, I thought today would never end, said Harry.
Me either, said Ron. There was a few seconds of awkward silence as they walked.
So how did you do that, Harry? asked Ron.
You mean the Divination O.W.L. test?
Yeah. Harry gave a small chuckle.
That movie we watched, its Dudleys favorite. We watched it so many times over the summer, I couldnt help but memorize it.
So you just faked the entire thing?
Yep, said Harry, sounding quite happy with himself.
Excellent, said Ron nodding his head. They reached the door to the Gryffindor common room and entered, finding themselves right in the middle of a giant party. No inch of the room was spared from decorations of all sorts, extremely colorful and intricate. At the center of the room, there was a large table, decked with food all over
Come and join the fun! yelled Fred, who now had his arm wrapped around Harrys neck, dragging him further into the room. Even with everything set out, looking absolutely splendid, the last thing he wanted to do was party all he wanted to do was collapse into his bed. He ached all over, his mind felt like a dried out sponge, and it took more effort to keep his eyes open than to lift a elephant above his head. 
Im sorry Fred, said Harry. But I really need to just go to sleep.
Oh, I know just how you feel, he said, releasing his grip from his shoulder. But at least take a few of these with you for later, theyre me and Georges latest creation: Shape Shifting Sweeties, theyre basically what we made before the Mirror Munchies, the things we thought were bad. But, as it turns out, these are even more fun! They make you turn into whatever youre closest to. Only with these, if you get closer to something else, you change into that thing instead. So, someone could change into several different people in just a few seconds. Theyre really cool!
Thanks Fred, said Harry, taking a handful. Then, just when Freds full hands got near Harrys, he flashed a bright yellow all over, and immediately turned into a copy of Harry. Harry caught the candy just in time, because half a second later, he fell over. 
Heh, gotcha Harry, said what was a second ago, Fred. He extended his arm, and quickly helped him up. Sorry, but I just had to test it out on someone. Im not really you, or Fred, Im George.
Oh thats, um okay George, said Harry confusedly. George smiled and ran off, magically shifting his shape every few seconds. Harry just shook his head and rubbed his eyes. How could these people even think about partying? Almost all of them had just spent the entire day taking the hardest tests of their lives! 
Harry used his last ounce of energy to run up the stairs and into his dormitory. Not much to his surprise, he saw that Ron, Seamus and Dean were all asleep. But Neville was nowhere to be seen. Harry remembered that he had been missing since their second O.W.L where could he have been all that time? Harry, however, did not feel like pondering that question too much at this time, he just quickly changed into his nightclothes, and collapsed onto his bed. Not too much later, he fell right asleep dreaming about tomorrow, when he would bring his mom back to life the thing he had waited all year to do was going to finally arrive.
The next morning at breakfast, Harry didnt remember how long he had been asleep for, or any of the dreams he had. All he remembered was that it felt like it was way too short a time to be asleep. He, along with the rest of the fifth years and seventh years, looked as though they were all zombies, with purple bags under their eyes that reached down to their nose. All of them were anxiously awaiting their O.W.L. and N.E.W.T. tests results from the owls that would be bringing them. It was a very tense moment, one-third of the entire Great Hall was eagerly looking up at the hole where the owls came through, searching for any indication that they were on their way. 
Theyre coming! yelled a Ravenclaw seventh year. She jumped up from her chair, and pointed to the hole. Everyone in the room quickly looked up and heard the fluttering of many wings along with several hoots. Suddenly, all of the owls poured into the room and zipped towards their recipients. Hedwig quickly found her way to Harry, and he eagerly ripped open his brown envelope that contained his test results. He saw that everyone around him was doing the same. 
Nice! I got eleven O.W.L.s! said Ron. Thats much better than Fred or George did, and its one better than Charlie did! Harry quickly congratulated Ron, and took out his sheet of grades, he quickly looked it over, and was extremely happy with the results.
Oh man! I got fourteen O.W.L.s! he yelled. All I missed was oh yeah, the History of Magic Advanced O.W.L. and the Divination O.W.L. Hah! Look at Professor Trelawneys comment: You are the only student I have ever taught who had ever gotten the Advanced O.W.L., but not the Average O.W.L. in my class.
Good job Harry, said Hermione, who was currently glancing over her sheet. Once it appeared as though she was finished , she folded it up nicely and put it neatly back into the envelope. 
How did you do Hermione? asked Ron.
Just fine, she said quickly.
Oh, you couldnt have done that bad.
I did just fine, Ron.
But, Ron wasnt happy with that answer. He quickly dove for her envelope and tore it open. He ripped out her paper and unfolded it. He read it quickly and when he was finished, his mouth was gaping open and his eyes were huge.
Hermione he choked out, you got sixteen O.W.L.s. Thats a perfect score! Not even Bill or Percy did that well!
I guess all that extra studying paid off then, she said, grabbing her exam results back and stuffing them away into her backpack. 
Hermione said Ron, still having the same expression, you are you are
A know-it-all? A brain? A-
A brilliant witch, said Ron, totally defying what she thought he was going to say.
Th- thanks Ron, she said, with an amazed and happy expression on her face.
Harry then turned his head over to ask Dean and Seamus how they did, when he felt an arm on his shoulder. He looked behind him and saw Mrs. Figg. She wasnt looking her usual, happy self, she looked quite serious.
Are you ready, Harry? she asked. He nodded his head, so did Hermione and Ron. Mrs. Figg opened her eyes wide with fear.
Harry! she whispered loudly. You told them about this! Harry went red. He forgot all about telling Hermione and Ron about the Order of the Phoenix even though he wasnt supposed to.
Im sorry Mrs. Figg, said Harry. But, I couldnt do anything without them.
What things? she said, squeezing his shoulder tight. What else have you done that I dont know about? Harry remembered again that he hadnt told her that they were the ones who had rescued Sirius and Lupin from Azkaban. He had just assumed that they had told her they did it but that was evidently not the case. 
Well we kind of rescued Sirius and Lupin. said Harry. He looked up at Mrs. Figgs face, expecting to see her breathing fire all over him. What he did see, however, was a happily amazed face.
You did that? You three! she said. I am very impressed Harry! Not even some of the greatest dark wizards in the world could get into Azkaban, but you three fifth-years did it wow. Harry, you are truly greater than I could have ever thought.
Err- thanks, said Harry, happy to still be alive. 
Anyway, back to what I was saying. We need to lave as soon as possible to perform the ceremony, Harry. Your mother was born at one oclock in the afternoon, and it is now eleven. Meet me in my office in about an hour, and well get ready to go all of us.
You mean Ron and Hermione too?
Yes, especially them and Sirius and Lupin as well.
Why are they coming? asked Ron.
More security, said Mrs. Figg. Voldemort and his Death Eaters have been very quiet lately too quiet. We think they may be planning something big, and were not sure, but we think it may involve Lily. They may try and take her back the second after we resurrect her, while shes still weak. We need as much security as possible to make sure that doesnt happen.
Harry remembered what Malfoy had said, how his mom was going to be involved in something, but he had no idea what.
But will we make it back in time to be at the end of school feast? asked Harry. If all goes according to plan, she said, you will be back with hours to spare.
Alright Mrs. Figg, said Harry, Ill see you in an hour.
Good luck, Harry, she said, letting go of his shoulder and walking away.
What do you think is going to happen, Harry? asked Hermione.
I dont know Hermione, I dont know.
It was the fastest hour of Harrys life. It felt as though only a few seconds had passed between him talking with Mrs. Figg, and where the three of the were now: walking down to her office. The three of them were nervously talking about what to expect, when suddenly, Harry saw Neville walking down the hall.
Hey Neville! yelled Harry to him.
Oh, hi Harry, he said back.
Where have you been? asked Ron. You missed most of the tests!
Oh, I made them all up, he said.
You made them up already? said Harry.
Yeah, I was in the hospital wing all night. The teachers came in and gave me the tests there.
Why were you in the hospital wing? asked Hermione.
Oh, well those spells I used in the Advanced Charms test, they really drained me, I mean almost to the point of death. It was pretty scary.
What were those spells anyway? asked Hermione. Ive never heard of them before. Did you invent them?
Um yeah. Err- I got to go see you later! he yelled as he ran off.
Wow, I cant believe Neville invented those spells, said Hermione. They looked very advanced, so they probably needed a lot of magical energy to work, and a beginning Inventor like Neville doesnt know enough Arithmancy to create virtual magic and-
Okay Hermione, thats enough, said Ron.
This is certainly a whole new side to Neville that we have never seen, said Harry, watching him run down the hall. I wonder how many O.W.L.s he got.
No time for that, said Ron. Were there. Harry turned around, and saw that they were now at the door to Mrs. Figgs office. Nervously, he opened it, and saw her sitting in her chair behind the desk. 
Wheres Sirius and Lupin? asked Harry.
Theyre setting up outside, she said, and its time we should go and help them. Come along, follow me. She immediately sprung up, and led them on a short walk from her room to the entrance of the Forbidden Forest. When they got there, Harry heard a very familiar voice.
Hey Harry! said Colin Creevey. Harry spun around, and saw that he was flying on a broom, with a Quaffle under his arm.
What are you doing Colin? asked Harry.
Oh, just practicing a little Quidditch, he said, throwing the Quaffle up and down in the air. Next year, five of the people on the Gryffindor team are going to be gone, and youll need more players! I figured I should practice a little to get ready for tryouts next year.
Well, good job then Colin, said Harry. Good luck and oh, try not to play around here. It is the FORBIDDEN Forest after all.
Sure thing Harry, he said, flying away slowly. As much as Harry found Colin to be the most annoying little kid on Earth, there was just something about him that made Harry unable to really dislike him.
The four started walking in the direction that led to the giants, and it wasnt long before they arrived at the ceremonial altar that Sirius and Lupin had just finished setting up the podium. It was a very intricately carved piece of dark golden wood. Every inch was covered in some sort of design, and there were curving lines at each corner that twisted towards the center of the altar, the spot where the skeleton of Lily Potter laid. Harry glanced at it for only a second, and then turned away. He didnt want to look at it again until it was alive.
Well you arrived at just the right time, said Sirius, wiping his dirty hands together. We just finished setting it up, so you dont have to help any.
Thank you Sirius, Remus, said Mrs. Figg. Any signs of You-Know-Who yet?
Nothing yet, said Lupin. But that doesnt mean that theres not going to be anything, we still have to be vigilant.
Yes and we should perform the ceremony as soon as possible, said Mrs. Figg. Its already twelve-thirty Harry, would you please step up to the front of the altar.
Harry slowly walked before it, and stood there, not knowing what to do. How was he supposed to perform his Order? Nobody ever told him how to call upon the power of the phoenix.
Sirius, please release the phoenixes. Sirius reached into a large brown bag that was next to the altar. He opened it up, and pointed his wand inside it. Slowly but surely, he magically bought each both phoenixes out, and placed them in the air above the altar. Once both were in the air, he took his magic spell off of them, and they began circling Harrys moms skeleton, slinging softly. It was a very serene and tranquil song, that made Harry feel joyous and warm all over.
Harry, said Mrs. Figg, now put your arms out, and say: Liberate Lily ex inferis. 
Harry took a deep breath, and did as she said.
Liberate Lily ex inferis, he whispered. Suddenly, Harry heard the sound a phoenix, but not one of the ones that was already circling. It sounded much farther away but getting closer, and quickly! Within half a second, another phoenix appeared above the body, and began circling with the other two, singing in perfect harmony with them.
Say it again, Harry, said Mrs. Figg.
Liberate Lily ex inferis, said Harry again. The second the words left his mouth, a dim white light flew out from both of his hands, and into the skeleton. The phoenixes above began circling slightly faster as well, and singing louder. Harry let out a small gasp, along with Ron and Hermione.
Say it again, louder! said Sirius.
Liberate Lily ex inferis! he yelled. A bright white light flew out of his hands this time, and flowed right into the carcass, causing it to jump a little. The phoenixs song was even louder now, and they were flying faster than before.
Keep saying it! yelled Lupin over the phoenixes. Harry repeated the words over and over, louder and louder each time. Now there was a constant flow of pure-white energy going form his palms to his mothers skeleton. The phoenixs song was almost deafening as they circled so fast, they were creating a blur in the air. 
Still, Harry kept yelling over and over. His hands were beginning to hurt, just a little at first, but then it became almost excruciating. He couldnt take it anymore, so he let go. He fell backwards onto the hard ground, and the flow of white energy stopped, but the phoenixes continued. The skeleton was now glowing a blinding white, so bright, that everyone had to turn away from it, or cover their eyes. Now the phoenixs song was so loud, it made Harrys ears fell like they were going to explode.
It should be finished any minute now! yelled Mrs. Figg, even though Harry could still barely hear her. He just kept sitting there on the ground, and watched this amazing sight. The skeleton was now beginning to hover in the air, and it was flying high; it came up right in the middle of the circling phoenixes, and began to spin in the center of them. Any second now, Harry would be reunited with his mother.
Just then, something new appeared: a black mark appeared in the white circle the phoenixes were creating from going so fast. At first it was hardly noticeable, but then it grew to be the size of one third of the circle. 
Whats going on!? yelled Harry.
I dont know! yelled Sirius back. 
The skeleton was now going from a blinding white to a deep black, as was the rest of the circle the phoenixes were making. There was no more white, only black all over.
Somethings gone wrong! yelled Lupin. The phoenixes slowed down now, and Harry could make out the individual ones. Slower and slower they went, until finally, Harry saw the problem, and it was more worse than he could possibly imagine. 
One of the phoenixes was a black phoenix.
NO! yelled Sirius. He jumped up to try and get the black phoenix away, but it was too high. He grabbed his wand, and started shooting at it, but every spell was just deflected away. The phoenixes were going incredibly slow now, but the skeleton was not slowing down; it was just a large swirling black mass. It began shooting off black beams of light in every direction, until the entire section of the forest was nothing more than a completely dark area.
Harry heard an explosion, and everything became white for just a second. He covered his eyes, and then looked up at where the skeleton had been. The two normal phoenixes were now lying on the ground, unconscious or dead, Harry couldnt tell. The black one, however, was still flying, next to what had previously been a skeleton. Harry looked up, and saw what was now there. He heard a dark laugh, and before he even saw who it was, he knew it was Lord Voldemort.


Chapter 29- Voldemorts Story
At first, no one said anything. Everyone was staring at Voldemort, and he was looking at all of them, straightening his sleeves. His snake-like face looked even more twisted than ever, his eyes were the size of tennis balls, his nose was no more than two single slits, and his mouth was the same, only horizontal instead. His hands were even more grotesque: his palms were now no more than spheres, and his fingers were just long and thin sticks popping out from it. He turned his attention over to Harry now, and gave a tiny smile.
Hello Harry Potter, he said in that snake-like voice of his. He immediately shot out three blue rings from his wand that went around Harry, Ron and Hermione, and forced them to the ground. No matter how hard Harry struggled, he couldnt get free of it. 
Voldemort was staring at his wand as if it were something hed never seen before.
Amazing he hissed.
You get away from them! yelled Sirius. He took out his wand, and pointed it at Voldemort. 
Avada Kedavra! he yelled. The familiar green beam of light shot out of his wand, right at Voldemort. Voldemort, however, didnt even flinch. He just stuck out his arm in the direction of the beam, which immediately stopped right where it was. He clenched his fingers together, and the beam melted into one, small green sphere that disappeared quickly. Voldemort glowed green for an instant, and the he turned his attention back to Harry.
Well what do you know, he said. It worked! Still looking at Harry, he pointed a single finger at Sirius, and he gave a giant yell of pain. Sirius fell backwards onto the ground, appearing to be unconscious. 
Amazing, my spells work! said Voldemort, looking happier than Harry had ever seen him. He turned towards Mrs. Figg now, looking ready to try out another one of his spells. Mrs. Figg, however, did not look intimidated.
Ah, Arabella I thought we would never meet again, he said. 
Tom, I see youve grown she said, looking disgusted.
You know each other!? yelled Harry.
Sadly, I taught him, said Mrs. Figg. I was the Arithmancy teacher at that time, one of his favorite classes.
She taught me everything I know, said Voldemort.
I taught you nothing! she said. Just as a father may disown his son even though he had him, I disown the teaching I gave you.
How touching, he said. In fact, it has affected me so much, I think I will give you a chance to live.
Who said anything about me dying? said Mrs. Figg.
We shall have a proper duel, one on one with a second each. You and Lupin shall be a team against me and my partner.
And who is your partner going to be?
Just then, the black phoenix landed down on the ground next to Voldemort. It curled up, making itself as small as possible, then it immediately transformed into a human, but not just any human, it was Wormtail. 
I shall be Wormtails second, he has not had the chance to fight much lately, and wants a chance to.
Millions of questions were forming inside Harrys head. What was going on? How could Wormtail transform into both a rat and a phoenix? What are the new spells that Voldemort was using? And most importantly, how had he gotten here in the first place?
Fine, said Mrs. Figg. Lupin shall be my second against Wormtail and you.
Excellent, hissed Voldemort. But, to make this a bit more interesting we shall put a bit more than our lives on the line for this duel.
What do you mean? asked Mrs. Figg.
Whoever wins this duel will own Harry Potter and his two friends.
No! Thats madness! That is crazy! Leave them out of this Tom!
Would you rather I kill all of you now then? Or just merely kill you and take the three of them now? At least this way, you have a chance at them Mrs. Figg was breathing hard, she kept looking back and forth, between Voldemort and Harry. Finally, she hung her head down, and nodded.
Alright, she said.
Then let the duel begin! yelled Voldemort. Wormtail stepped forward, and brandished his wand, just like Harry had seen done many times before at the Dueling Club.
Avada Kedavra! yelled Mrs. Figg. The green beam shot out.
Porcini Magus! yelled Wormtail. A pinkish beam came out of his wand, and met in midair with Mrs. Figgs. The two spells fought for domination over the other, but within seconds, the stronger one came out on top. 
The entire beam turned a pink color, and the spell hit Mrs. Figg. She turned a dark pink all over, and quickly transformed into a pig. Her wand fell down to the ground, and she ran away, oinking as she went along.
Well that was easy, said Wormtail. I expected more of a challenge than that!
Prepare to get one then! yelled Lupin, jumping into the spot where Mrs. Figg had been. He stood there, waiting for Wormtail to make the first move.
Come on Peter, my old friend, make your move! growled Lupin. Wormtail, however, dropped his hand to the side. He turned his head around to look at Harry.
Harry Potter, he said, Did you ever wonder why the Homorphus Charm was never used on Lupin, the spell that can change werewolves back into humans, the spell that Lockhart supposedly used on many?
That made Harry think. Why didnt they just simply transform him back into a human? It would have been simpler than having to take that potion every month like he did in Harrys third year, and it would have saved him many problems as a child.
Ill take your silence as a no, said Wormtail. Remus here was never made human again because the Ministry of Magic loves werewolves. They are superior to normal wizards because they are nearly invincible. Almost every spell, including the killing curses, do not work on them. I could pelt old Remus here with every spell I know, and I doubt if hed so much as flinch.
So then what are you going to do? said Harry, feeling hopeful that Lupin may win the duel.
Wormtail didnt answer him, however. He just stuck out his silver arm at Lupin and smiled. What was he up to?
Silverargent! he yelled. A silvery beam shot out from his wand, and hit Lupin right in the chest. It knocked the wind out of him, and he fell over backwards, landing on the ground, just like Sirius did. 
No! You beat him! yelled Harry.
Remember how I said ALMOST every spell does not work on werewolves? Well, one of them that does is the Silver Spell, one that can only be conjured from a silvery object. It kills them instantly your friend is dead Harry Potter.
You killed Lupin? asked Harry, not wanting to believe it.
Im afraid so Mr. Potter, said Voldemort. And with his death, you belong to me.
Never, I will never join you! yelled Harry. 
I dont think you understand, said Voldemort. You see, you have absolutely no choice in the matter, it is not a voluntary thing.
The second you release me, Ill get Ron or Hermione to kill me. That way, I wont have to join you, spat Harry. Voldemort almost looked hurt by this statement.
Harry, how come you dont want to join me? I am the most powerful wizard in the world, I have the greatest army in the world, and with your help, we can own the entire world! Why wont you join me?
Because you killed my parents, said Harry quickly. Voldemort sighed.
Yes, sadly I did, said Voldemort, almost sounding guilty. But, your mother didnt have to die, that was her own fault.
You keep saying that, said Harry, being curious. Why didnt she have to die?
Harry! said Voldemort, sounding appalled. You dont think, as powerful as I am, that I would still want to kill my own daughter, do you? 
That statement made Harrys mind feel like it was going to explode. His mother was Voldemorts daughter? No, theres no way that could possibly be!
No, you cant be her father its-
Impossible? said Voldemort. Well, thats what everyone in the wizarding world thinks, except for you and me.
But how how could you be her father? That just cant be! Her father was a Muggle. I dont know much about them, but I certainly know that the father was not a dark wizard!
Harry, your simple mind angers me, said Voldemort. Of course the father that raised her was not me, it was someone else, whose name I do not even know. But, the father whos DNA she has half of is indeed mine, I can guarantee you.
But how? asked Harry, feeling as though he were on the verge of tears.
Ah, Harry, that day was one that shall stay in my mind for all eternity. I was young, around the age of what forty something I think, and I was just getting ready to start my reign of terror. Ahh, those were the days Harry those were the days. Staying up late with friends, making plans on how we were going to take over the world, many of which I used later. It was a grand time.
One night, after an especially large party, I stumbled out into the street as drunk as a donkey. I also had a bundle of magical flowers with me, given to me from the various women at the party; I was especially popular with that crowd in those days. 
I came upon a house, and saw a couple on the front porch. I saw them arguing and yelling at each other, and eventually the wife went inside and slammed the door while the husband just walked off in the opposite direction.
I wanted to make sure that my transfiguration skills were up to par, so I quickly transformed myself into the man I had seen walk away. After my success, in morphing, I decided to see how I looked to others, to be one-hundred percent sure that I had it down perfectly. So, I walked up to the house I had seen him storm away from, and rang the doorbell. The woman I had seen before came to the door, and she saw the magical flowers I had in my hand. She immediately took them away from me and sniffed them deeply. She said something like, Lets never argue again, and she ran inside with me.
The next morning I woke up, fully conscious again. I was horrified at what I had done, and ran away back to my hideout. Nine months later, I found out that that woman had given birth to twins, Lily and Petunia. I also found out that one of them, Lily of course, was magical. She became the heir of Slytherin.
My mom is not the heir of Slytherin! yelled Harry. 
Harry, why do you think your mother had a basilisk watch? asked Voldemort. 
I I-
Yes, exactly. The basilisk is they symbol of Slytherin, everything that it stands for! Destroying whatever is on your path in order to reach your goal! The basilisk personifies that by turning everything in its path into stone, until it finally reaches its destination.
But how did she get it?
To answer that, I must return to my story. Back then, I was weak, and was hit with pangs of guilt. Wanting the best for my magical daughter, I sent her The Standard Book of Spells Collection, years first through seventh, and the basilisk watch, to show her who she really was! By the time she had gotten her Hogwarts letter of acceptation, she knew many spells that some of the graduating seventh years didnt even know. So, she became one of the best students Hogwarts has ever had.
Harrys brain had never had such an overwhelming amount of information put in it at once. He felt like his brain was going to detonate, and he just wanted to try and forget everything he had just heard but he couldnt. 
But why did you attack in the first place? asked Harry. He might as well try and take advantage of this opportunity, Voldemort was pouring out more information to him than he had ever. Before he died, he wanted to know everything. 
You mean why did I attack your parents, Harry?
Yes.
Well, to get the answer to that, you must first go back to where I left off on my last tale. Your mother had just gotten accepted to Hogwarts, and I had gotten word of that through my sources. I was just about ready to start on my campaign, so I needed all the help I could get. I saw my daughter, that no one except me knew was my daughter, as an excellent advantage to me.
So, I visited her one day, disguised as a friend of hers. When we were out of sight of her parents, I transformed back into my normal form, and told her that I was the one who had made sure she was accepted to Hogwarts. And, in return for doing that, I wanted her to do something for me. I told her that she had to find a man named James Potter, who I knew was the heir of Gryffindor, marry him, and have a child. Since I told her she had to do this or else I would make sure she didnt get into Hogwarts, she quickly agreed and ran home, becoming a Death Eater from then on.
My plan was simple: get the most recent heir of Slytherin, Lily, to have a child with the most recent heir of Gryffindor: James. Their child would become the heir of the fathers house, Gryffindor. Since I am extremely knowledgeable in the field of this study, I knew that only way to completely destroy a bloodline was to destroy two generations of it at once. I would kill James, then you, and then Gryffindor would be no more. All of its magical spirit would be drained, and it would be no more than a house at Hogwarts, much like a person after his or her soul has been taken: no more than a shell. With Gryffindor gone, Slytherin could easily take over the other two, and turn Hogwarts into a school for the Dark Arts.
But, my plan failed in so many ways. I knew that Lily would be attracted to James, yes, but I had no clue she would actually fall in love with him, and care more for him than her own life. When you were born, I reminded her of her promise, but she did not care anymore. She was no longer a child, and I underestimated her. But, I had to destroy Gryffindor anyway. I barged into their house, and immediately killed James. I moved in on you, but your mother wouldnt have it. I told her to stand aside, and she would live, but she cared for you just as much as James. Alas, I had no choice. I killed her, than went for you and you know the rest. If I had just bided my time, waited for you grow up and your mother to die on her own, I could have accomplished my goal without being delayed.
So then why did you want to still kill me afterwards? asked Harry. Years later, why should you inconvenience yourself anymore?
I did not care if you died or not from then on, Harry, said Voldemort. It just so happened that you were poking around in every one of my plans to become what I am today. It has just been recently that I have decided you would be more valuable to me as an ally rather than dead.
So thats what youve been trying to do all year. It certainly took you many tries to finally get me.
Yes, my unofficial motto is: Always have a backup plan, or three. Every time you foiled one of my ideas this year, I had another one ready to go. After Wormtails failed attack on you at the Dursleys residence, I had him set a trap for you on the way to Azkaban, which I told him not to really concentrate on since it wasnt even that good of an idea, I was ready with another plan waiting for you at the prison. When you beat Wormtail at Azkaban, I tried again by having him steal Lilys skeleton and lure you out here . When that one failed as well, he tried again at the Yule Ball. Even when that one didnt work, I did not give up hope, since all the time after Wormtail stole Lilys carcass, I have had another plan that would definitely work.
And which one was that?
The one that you have just seen, Harry, said Voldemort. I made Wormtail into a Polymagus, how I did that, you shall find out if you join me, and be able to become both a regular phoenix, and a black phoenix. He has been the one following you around, trying to get you, and he was also one of the birds used in the resurrection. If my other plans failed, and it came down to this one, he was to force the two other phoenixes to channel their energy to Lilys skull, where I have been secretly hiding for the past several months. All of their magic would go into me, and make me more powerful than I have ever been, allowing me to utilize many of the spells I have just invented that require more magical energy than is usually possible. 
The spell I used on Sirius, the spell on used on you, the Magus Morpher, and the Sight Spell, and many more are all my own inventions. I have hundreds more ready to go as well.
The Magus Morpher? The Sight Spell? said Harry. Which ones are those?
Those were my first new spells, said Voldemort. They do not require any more magical power than I already had, but they are extremely useful anyway. The Magus Morpher allows an Animagus to see the human form of another Animagus, and the Sight Spell allows other people to see what someone else sees.
Suddenly, it all became clear to Harry.
So, the combination of those two spells is what you used to make every see Sirius in Diagon Alley, said Harry. Wormtail used to Magus Morpher on him, and then you used the Sight Spell on him. Everyone saw through Wormtails eyes that the dog was actually Sirius. Voldemort clapped his hands.
Very good, Harry, he said. You are quite good. However, you were not good enough to detect this trap, or to figure out the other two which I have planned, just in case this one happens to fail.
You mean, you have even more backup plans? said Harry, amazed at how far ahead Voldemort planned.
Ah yes, he hissed. I cannot tell you much about them, you know, but I can tell you that one of them has to do with your magical cousin.
Magical cousin? But, my only cousin is Dudley!
Yes, thats him Dudley, said Voldemort. We were going to force him to kill you. He could have been a very powerful wizard, all he needed was a little training and his powers could have rivaled mine.
No, there has to be some mistake, said Harry. Dudley? A wizard? No way! The Dursleys hate all magic! Theres no possible way Dudley could be a wizard!
And yet, there has to be, because he is. Harry, when you were left at the Dursleys, there was a note in the basket you were in. It told the Dursleys about you, about what happened, and about me. I am the reason they were so cruel to you! The only reason they mistreated you was to try and beat the magic out of you, so that you would grow up leading a normal life, and would never have to deal with me. They wanted the best for you, Harry, but could never show it or else you may get your powers back that they had been trying to force out of you.
As for Dudley being a wizard, I can assure you, he is. Remember, your mother an Petunia were twins, so they both had the same magical potential. Lily, however, was the one I decided to help, so when the time came for Hogwarts to choose who the newest students were going to be, Lily was on the list, and Petunia wasnt, even though they both could do magic. 
Despite the fact that she didnt get chosen for Hogwarts, that didnt mean she lost her magic. When she had Dudley, he got her magical DNA, and he is a wizard. Not wanting you to have the Kinsafe Charms protection available to you at Hogwarts by having Dudley around you all the time, I made sure that his name was not down for Hogwarts, and that he never got a letter. And, since he hasnt used magic his entire life, he is extremely ripe and ready to be picked, and can become very powerful. But, Im sure you know about that magical theory.
No I dont whispered Harry, amazed at what Voldemort was telling him. The Dursleys had actually been trying to help Harry all of that time, Petunia hated Lily because she got accepted to Hogwarts and she didnt, and Dudley was a wizard it was all almost too much.
What are they teaching you at that school of yours these days!? yelled Voldemort. Well, Harry, the first spell a wizard uses with his or her permanent wand determines the average power he or she will have for the rest of his or her life, and the longer a wizard waits before using a wand, the more powerful his or her first spell will be. So, Dudley can be a very powerful wizard, he has an extra five years of no magic on his side.
Do they, that is the Dursleys know that Dudley is a wizard? asked Harry.
Oh no, said Voldemort. Whenever a magical student, Petunia in this case, is not accepted to any magical school, their memories of their magical powers are erased. Petunia forgot that she ever had any magical powers, and they forbade her parents to ever tell her that she ever had any.
But, if she doesnt remember any of her magical powers, then why does she still hate my mom? Shouldnt she have forgotten about not being accepted to Hogwarts?
Oh, that well, actually, that is a whole other story. You see, even though your mothers parents were forbidden to tell Petunia that she ever had magical powers, there was nothing stopping them from reminding her the Lily had them. She was very well aware that Lily was a witch, and in fact, in her youth, she enjoyed seeing her sister perform magical tricks before she was sent off to Hogwarts.
Then why does she hate her?
That happened many years later, just two years before you were born, Harry. You see, Petunia and Lilys mother got sick, she got oh, what is the Muggle word for it ah! Cancer, yes, thats it.
How did that make her stop liking her?
I was getting to that! snapped Voldemort, getting out of, for an instant, his newfound kind demeanor. However, he quickly put his fake smile back on. Well, Petunia knew Lily was a witch, so, she asked her if she could cure their mother by transfiguring the cancer cells, transporting them outside of the body, or by just making them disappear. As expected, your mother refused.
Why did she do that?
Well, do one, she couldnt physically do it. Wand laws have been bouncing all over the place ever since magic was discovered, Harry, and it just so happened, that at that time, non-graduate wizards werent even allowed to take their wands home during the holidays. Since her mother got sick during the summer holidays, shed have to somehow go back to Hogwarts and steal her wand from the secure vault they were all kept in. First of all, she would have to find the school, and since it is not on any map, and the Hogwarts train does not even exist out of school season, it would be next to impossible to find.
Then, if she somehow found the school, she would have to break into it, and steal her wand from the wizard guards. Even if she managed to do THAT without using any magic, she would still have to return to the Muggle world, and perform the magic that she barely knew how to do. The second the spell came out of her wand, the Ministry of Magic would be on her faster than a a
A cannibal on a missionary? suggested Harry lazily. Voldemort sighed.
Well, it will have to do. Anyway, she would be expelled for sure. So, naturally, she had to refuse. Once she told her sister that, she practically disowned her, and hated her from then on. Since she left before Lily could explain, she just figured that she thought she was superior to the rest of her family since she was a witch.
How do you know all this? exclaimed Harry.
Well, I do have sources everywhere Harry. Even when I was nothing more than a ghost, I still had my non-human sources constantly feeding me information. But, mostly, I got it all from just asking your mother. After all, it wasnt until after she married your father that she realized who I really was, and didnt talk to me anymore. 
You said you had another backup plan, said Harry. What is that?
Oh, I cannot tell you that, Harry, said Voldemort. For even with my most brilliant plans, there is a chance something could go wrong, and I dont want my other plan to have been in vain, now do I?
I suppose not, said Harry, shaking his head, and trying to comprehend all that he had been told. But suddenly, it was all coming together for Harry! The new spells Voldemort had invented! Neville using the spells that no one had ever heard of! His mysterious invisible book!
I know your backup plan. grinned Harry.
Oh really now? asked Voldemort, looking quite impressed.
Yes, said Harry. If all else fails, youre going to have Neville kill me! Voldemort let out a laugh that was so loud, the birds in the trees flew away.
Neville!? Ha ha ha ha! laughed Voldemort. That boy can do nothing.
He showed off some of your more impressive spells at the Advanced O.W.L. test for Charms, said Harry. The Impaling Curse, the Inferno Curse, and more.
I know that, said Voldemort. But just because he can say the magic words doesnt mean he knows hot to use the spells properly.
So he is a Death Eater!
Yes. said Voldemort. He joined the day of the Yule Ball. It was almost pathetic, seeing him beg me to let him join our Order.
But he said he was at the Hogsmeade party.
That was just his alibi, said Voldemort. That day is when he got his book, and he has been reading it every day. However, it appears his reading comprehension is not very good. It says in there that most of the spells require more magical energy than most wizards can provide. That is why I am not using them on you right now, I dont want to drain my energy to quickly. 
So thats why he had to go to the Hospital Wing, said Harry. He must have used more magical energy than he had.
Exactly said Voldemort. But, as ingenious as it was for you to figure that out, Harry, that is not my other backup plan but thanks for the idea.
Master, said Wormtail, it is time to go.
Very well then, said Voldemort. He pointed his wand at Harry and muttered something. The spell that had been holding him there disappeared, and Harry stood up. He looked behind him, and saw Hermione. She looked just as shaken as he did. Harry looked over on his other side, and expected to see Ron, but he was not there. Harry tried not to show any expression of surprise because of not seeing Ron there; if there was any chance of escape, he didnt want to screw it up.
But, before we go, I just want to make an act to show my good faith, Harry, said Voldemort. To show you that we are on the same side, and that I have no desire to kill you, I shall make you into a Polymagus.
You you will? said Harry, surprised. 
Of course, said Voldemort. Harry, I am only destructive toward my enemies, but to my allies, I am a god.
Then what are you waiting for? said Harry, wanting to see where this was going. Maybe, if this worked and he got away, he could be even more than a competition to Malfoy. If it worked, he would have nothing over him anymore.
Very well, first, I shall put a Shield Spell on you, said Voldemort, waving his wand, and making a glossy beam come out and flow all over Harry. It felt like water, only much harder and stronger.
And next, the Killing Curse. It will not kill you, however. The shield shall act as your mothers sacrifice did. However, this time, I shall be prepared for the spells deflection. When I use the curse, I shall transfer a bit of myself into you, forever connecting yourself with me. From there, while you are only an inch from death, I will bring you back to my hideout where we will perform the rest of the process.
No! yelled Harry, trying to run away. But, the shield made his feet feel heavier than stone. It was impossible to move. How could he have let himself be drawn into this trap? Did he really want power so much that he has willing to get it from Voldemort? Why didnt he question it more?
Harry saw Wormtail walk up to Voldemort and whisper something to him.
A third one? What do you mean hes missing? Arg, Wormtail, I dont have time for this, we shall find him later! Avada Kedavra! yelled Voldemort. The green beam flew out of his wand, and right towards Harry. He closed his eyes.
NOO! came a voice from the bushes. Harry opened his eyes, hoping it wasnt Ron giving himself away. Who he saw amazed him. It was Colin Creevey.
He ran as fast as he could, and reached the Killing Curses beam just before it hit Harry. His eyes rolled back into his head, and some blood poured out from his mouth. He hit the ground hard, and Harry knew he was dead.
Colin you saved me said Harry, crying. He couldnt believe it. The boy who he had always tried to shove off out of the way, the one who had exalted him, the one who thought he was the greatest, who was a god, sacrificed his life so that he could live. It was enough to make anyone cry.
Well, I think I just killed the third one, said Voldemort, looking down at Colins body. Idiotic boy, he should have known I would just do it again he cannot stop me. But, he does deserve some recognition. While stupid, it was a very brave act, said Voldemort, bending down to Colins corpse, and took out his wand. He muttered something, and a hole formed next to Colin. He was going to bury him.
This would be a perfect time to do something, thought Harry to himself, while Voldemort was distracted. If only he could somehow talk to Ron but he remembered that he could! Malfoy said that all Animagi are connected telepathically he had to try it.
Ron! Ron! RON! Can you hear me! RON! yelled Harry in his head, trying to somehow direct his thoughts Ron had to hear him, it was the only way.
Harry? HARRY? Is that you? came a voice in Harrys head. It was Ron!
Ron, thought Harry, where are you?
Im right next to Colins body, Im camouflaged as a chameleon, thought Ron.
Okay, good, thought Harry. Ron, in my pocket there are some candies that Fred and George made. Get one of them out quickly!
Harry felt Ron climbing up him, even though he couldnt see him. He felt his long tongue squirm down into his pocket, and grab hold of one of candies.
Now what, thought Ron.
Climb up that tree over there, the one right above Voldemort. Hurry! Hes putting him in the ground right now, we dont have much time!
Alright, alright!
Harry waited, as every second went by, more and more sweat dripped down his forehead. This had to work, it just had to!
Okay, Im in the tree, thought Ron.
Now, you have to do this perfectly Ron. I need you to drop down onto Voldemorts face, and shove the candy into his mouth.
Alright Harry, thought Ron. He sounded scared, more than he had ever been in his life. Harry had forgotten something important. While he had been around Voldemort many times before, this was the first time Ron or Hermione had even seen him. He was impressed by how they were holding up. 
Here I go! Ron thought loudly. 
The poor, poor boy, hissed Voldemort. See Harry? Deep down, I am just as merciful and decent as your beloved Dumbledore. I honor my allies, and since this was a friend of yours Ron I think his name was he deserves to be- AHH!
Ron had evidently landed on Voldemorts face. Harry saw him jump up from his crouched position, and randomly grab all over his face, trying to peel off whatever was there. Harry saw Rons invisible reptilian arm holding the single Shape Shifting Sweetie. He saw it being forced into Voldemorts slit of a mouth. Instantly, it went in, and Voldemort gripped his neck, trying not to choke on it. It slid right down his thin neck.
Thats for killing Sirius and Colin! yelled Harry, still magically frozen in place.
What is this!? choked Voldemort, still gripping his neck. He fell to his knees on the ground, and Wormtail was furiously trying every spell he knew on his master to try and cure him. Voldemort flashed a bright white all over for just a second, and then he turned into a copy of
Ron! yelled Harry. He had just transformed back into his human self, and was standing next to a copy of himself, what Voldemort had become.
What have you done! cried Voldemort in Rons voice. Wormtail! Get them for this! This body is far to weak to do any magic in! He fled away, and quickly disappeared into the forest.
With pleasure master! cried Wormtail, rolling up his sleeves. He took out his wand, and pointed it right at Harry. He gave him a look that said he was going to do something nasty.
Fourmi Magus! he yelled. Harry closed his eyes shut as the beam flew at him, he felt it hit him, and he opened them, to see what he had become.
Then, to his surprise, the orange beam bounced right off of him. It reflected, just like a mirror, right back at Wormtail. He let out a giant moan, and turned orange all over. Seconds later, he was just a tiny ant, no bigger than a crumb of bread. Harry thought he saw him run away, but couldnt be sure; he was so small. Ron and Hermione ran over to Harry.
What did you do, Harry? asked Ron.
Im not sure, he said. But I think it had something to do with the fact that I saved that worms life two years ago. Maybe its like when someone sacrifices their life for you, and they give you a protection. If I let him live, maybe it gave me some sort of protection against him attacking me.
We dont have time to discuss it now, sad Hermione. It was the first thing shed said for almost an hour, and she sounding exhausted. We have to go back to Hogwarts and tell Dumbledore what happened.
Um, arent you forgetting something? asked Harry.
No, what? said Ron.
Im frozen here! yelled Harry. Ron and Hermione had forgotten that Voldemort had put that Shield Spell on Harry in the excitement of the moment.
Oh man, why did you have to agree to that, Harry? said Hermione, desperately shooting random counter curses on Harry. None of them were working, though. That shield was one of Voldemorts new spells.
He would have done it anyway, said Harry, trying to reassure himself from his actions. How could he have been so stupid?
Oh none of these are working! yelled Hermione, desperately flailing her wand in the air. This spell is practically unbreakable! Probably only You-Know-Who-
Please, Hermione, said Harry, youve seen him now, you can call him by his name. Okay?
The counter curse is probably one of his new spells as well. Probably only V- Vol Voldemort would know how to break this shield.
Yeah, said Ron, either him or Dumbledore.
Did someone say my name? came a voice from far away. It had an enchanting effect over everyone, it seemed to flow all over them, not just through their ears. It reached inside them, and brought out hope and joy.
Professor Dumbledore! yelled the three of them at once, turning their heads in the direction they heard the voice come from. Sure enough, the tall, blue-cloaked, long bearded fellow popped into view from the bushes. 
We have to get out of here, he said in a very non-imperative voice, as if what he said was important, but not necessarily the top priority.
Professor Dumbledore, squeaked Hermione, how did you? I mean how are you here? Dumbledore came slightly closer, but still stayed in the bushes, as if he was keeping watch for Voldemort to return any second.
Ah, well I was in my office about an hour ago, he said, when I turned my attention towards my phoenix, Fawkes. While I had been noticing for the past few months that his brightness has been going down, along with his beauty, today he looked absolutely horrid. He was a deep green and gray all over, and he was melting and flaking off in certain places. I knew that could be the result of only one thing: a clone that has used up all of its energy.
Harry swallowed hard. So, Dumbledore knew that someone had copied Fawkes, and he had already suspected Harry. That, along with being in the Forbidden Forest, would surely be enough to get him expelled and then some.
Well, there is a very simple spell that can show the user where the original of a clone is-
I wish wed known that one when we were trying to convince our clones we were the real ones, whispered Ron loudly to himself.
-so I used it, and sure enough, it led me here. I heard screaming, and I knew that only one person could be responsible for this: Voldemort.
Well, you got it Professor, said Harry. But, can you please help us out of here? I mean, wed rather be expelled alive instead of dead.
Some of us anyway whispered Hermione to herself. All Dumbledore did was laugh.
Harry, come now, you dont really think I could possibly expel you, now do you? Few wizards have even met with Voldemort once and lived to tell about it. But you, you have met with him what is it now five times and each time, you have come out of it alive and well. You are far too good a wizard for our side to lose!
What about Ron and Hermione? Will they be in trouble?
Oh, Im sure they will be fine as well, chuckled Dumbledore. But come now, we must leave quickly! Voldemort could return any minute.
Um, professor, said Harry, I am a little stuck here
Oops! said Dumbledore, Sorry there Harry! He pointed his wand right at Harry, mumbled something, and three bright spheres came out. They revolved around Harry for a few seconds, each time making the shield around him dimmer and dimmer, until finally, it was gone. The three spheres went back inside Dumbldores wand.
Now come quickly, said Dumbledore, we have to be fast! Oh, and dont worry about Lupin and Sirius, Ill get them. He picked them up, and slung them over his shoulder, then signaled to Harry, Ron, and Hermione to follow him. He dashed ahead quickly, appearing to hover rather than run. Harry, who hadnt walked for more than an hour, rubbed his legs, and ran right after him, throwing away the leaves and brushes that got in his way. As fast as he went, though, he was no match for Dumbledore.
Professor Dumbledore! yelled Harry. Please slow down! I can barely see you or keep up with you! Harry waited for Dumbldores response, and heard some faint words, but could not make out any of them. Still, he continued running forward.
Why is he going so fast!? yelled Ron, quickly avoiding a large stump.
I dont know, said Hermione, trying to catch up with them. Arg! For once I wish I had a broomstick!
Dont worry, said Harry, I can see the end of the forest just ahead! He pointed forward, and indicated a single beam of light flowing into the forest. Harry sprinted now, feeling that Voldemort was all around him, just waiting for him to slow down.
Seconds later, Harry reached the end of the forest, quickly followed by Ron and Hermione. They exited it, out of breath and panting. When he had caught his breath, Harry stood up, and looked around. 
Where were they? This wasnt the way they came in! Where was Hagrids hut? All that was around them was just more green grass, like a giant meadow. Most importantly, where was Dumbledore?
Professor Dumbledore! yelled Harry, cupping his hands over his mouth.
Im right here, Harry, whispered Dumbledore. He was leaning up against a single tree that was right next to the outskirts of the forest. He didnt look his usual self. He had one foot up against the tree, and was cleaning his fingernails. Lupin and Sirius lay there, on the ground next to him. But that didnt matter right now, they just had to get out of here.
Professor, we have to go! said Harry. Dumbledore looked at him for a second, and stood up from leaning against the tree. He reached into his pocket, and took out his wand, holding against his side.
Harry he said. His voice was nothing like it used to be, it was colder now it sent chills through Harrys spine. Do you remember my motto?
No professor said Harry, extremely confused. He looked Dumbledore over. He was still standing very far away from him, but now that he was standing still, there was something different about him what was it? Harry looked allover him, scanned him like a robot would. Shoes, robe, wand, beard everything seemed to be in order. Then, it hit him! The eyes! They were big, with tiny black pupils surrounded by a red iris. Completely different from how he normally looked.
RememberAlways have a backup plan, or three? he hissed. Now Harry knew what happened. Somehow Voldemort had changed into Dumbledore!
Well, I have another motto, he hissed, still keeping his distance, If I cant have it no one can! AVADA KEDAVRA!
The green bam flashed out of his wand. Instinctively, Harry fell to the ground, to avoid it. He felt the warmth of the beam soar over him, like a small phoenix. 
BAM!
What was that sound? Even with his hands over his ears, Harry knew he heard something. The beam should have hit nothing, though. It should have gone right over Harrys head, and into the forest.
Quickly, Harry looked behind him. 
NOO! he yelled. Hermione had been hit.
Chapter 30- The Phoenix of the Order
Hermione had fallen to the ground. Her back lay against the hard, cold surface, and she had gone limp all over. She had an expression of terror on her face, wide eyes, and mouth open. It was eerie she looked alive, even though she was
Shes dead said Harry to himself. I cant believe it
Hermione said Ron, shaking. He ran up to her body, and put his ear to her heart, just to make sure. When Harry saw him bury his face into her shirt, he new he had heard no sound of a heart beating. Hermione had been hit by the Killing Curse, and there was nothing they could do. 
You monster! yelled Harry, quickly spinning around, pulling his wand out, and brandishing it at Voldemort, tears filling up his eyes. First you stop me from bringing back my mom then you kill Sirius then Colin now my best friend! Voldemort! You are going to pay!
Ha! A pathetic child like you? Defeat me? The idea is laughable laughed Voldemort, still looking like Dumbledore on the outside.
Ive done it before, I can do it again, said Harry, spit shooting from his mouth.
Yes, but now you dont have your dear mommys little protection, and I am one hundred fold more powerful than I was last time we met! hissed Voldemort, coming in closer to Harry. Harry scrunched his face up, and went red with rage.
How dare you look like Dumbledore, spat Harry. Youre not even worthy enough to wear one of his socks!
Oh dear boy, said Voldemort, if only you knew the truth if only. You would know who is the superior wizard! Think about it Harry only when all the colors are mixed together is black created, unlike white which is the absence of all color. Thus, black is superior to white! Evil triumphs over good! Evil is having the entire world mixed into one massive and great entity!
Yes, but if you combine all the colors of light, said Harry, trying to beat Voldemort on the intellectual level, what do you get? White Voldemort made fists, and went red.
Foolish boy! What is light without pigment to absorb it!?
What is pigment but merely the reflection of light!?
I can take no more! I failed to kill you, yes, but I will have you anyway! You could have been my right hand, but you shall now become my slave! Imperio!
The beam shot out of his wand, and straight at Harry. Immediately, Harry felt his body go stiff as the effect of the beam was taking him over. But, Harry had long since learned how to deal with this curse.
Slowly but surely, even with more and more energy coming from Voldemort, Harry resisted the curse, forcing his mind to react only to what he thought.
Go back. Go back! GO BACK! yelled Voldemorts voice in Harrys head. It was booming so loudly, it was almost impossible to resist. But, Harry concentrated on the little voice he heard, like a little mouse in a corner.
Go forward come on then, more! More! it squeaked but soon screamed. The more Harry concentrated on that voice, the louder it got. Almost instantly, it overpowered Voldemorts, and Harry began walking normally right toward him, with a smile on his face.
Voldemort, however, was not smiling. He saw him contort Dumbldores face into something that was foreign to that figure, an expression of shock. Voldemort was amazed Harry broke his curse!
You may have beaten the pathetic Imperius Curse, he spat, but lets see you deal with this! Crucio! The clear beam that had been connecting the two of them now turned to a deep red. 
It hurt for only a second, but Harry soon found himself free of pain, and full of joy. Despite the deaths, him not being able to see his mother, and being about to be killed by Voldemort, Harry dug down deep for a happy thought he found Cho.
That was more than enough to rub off the Cruciatus Curse. Within seconds, Harry was walking towards Voldemort again, bearing another smile. Voldemort now looked genuinely scared, and Harry swore he saw a single drop of sweat on his forehead.
Very well then, Mr. Potter, he said. I can see that you are more powerful than even I had imagined well goodbye!
For only an instant, the red beam connecting them disappeared, allowing Voldemort to get ready to perform another Killing Curse. This slight delay also gave Harry the chance to do something daring something he had to do!
Avada began Voldemort. Harry instantly changed his shoulder blades into wings, and shot forward, faster than sound.
Kedavra! he finished. Harry was just feet from him now, and saw the tip of the wand glowing green. A millionth of a second later, he was just inched from him, and Voldemort was doing just what Harry had expected.
There was a flash of white light, and then, where Voldemort had been, there was now a copy of Harry, wings and all. The green beam shot out of his wand, and hit the real Harry, knocking him over.
Was he dead? Was he dying?
No, he couldnt be! He could still feel every one of his limbs working in his brain, everything was registering okay his plan had worked! Harry jumped up, and hovered into the air, looking at Voldemorts shocked face.
I guess Im not as powerful as you thought, chuckled Harry. My Killing Curse couldnt even kill me. Ha!
You will pay, Potter! yelled Voldemort, looking exactly like Harry, (except for the horrible eyes) shooting up into the air. Even though I may not be able to kill you in one shot, I can do it in many! Stupefy! A green ray shot from his wand and Harry, who was too excited from his last maneuver, didnt manage to dodge it. The spell hit him, and Harry fell to the ground. 
Harry! yelled Ron, all red-faced and eyed, jumping up from Hermione. He quickly took out his wand, and pointed it at Voldemort.
Korosucide! he yelled, sending the black beam high in the air, but just missing Voldemort. He flew to the side just in time, and dodged it. Voldemort pointed his wand at Ron, and muttered something. The beam came down and hit Ron, knocking him out, just as it did with Harry. 
Harry gave a groan, and closed his eyes. He heard Voldemort coming down from the sky, ready to make his finishing move on both of them. He had won, all hope was lost there was nothing they could do.
Harry heard him walking up right in front of him now, and pull out his wand from his pocket. He crouched down on the ground next to Harry, and placed his wand on his forehead. 
Now, Harry Im feeling nice today, so why dont you tell me what curse do you want me to kill you with? he laughed. Harry swore at him.
Now now dear lad, said Voldemort sarcastically, even at death, we should not forget our manners now should we? Well then if you dont want to make the choice, I will have to make it for you!
Harry closed his eyes, and prepared himself to see his mother. He felt the world around him begin to shake and rattle, and getting extremely warm. What kind of curse had Voldemort put on him?
The heat rose, and the ground shook more furiously. Was he going to be sucked underground? Harry clenched his eyes harder together, and was surprised that he was able to do that. Shouldnt he be dead by now?
Harry quickly opened his eyes, and felt weak at the sight before him. He saw the real Voldemort, not him or Dumbledore, laying there, appearing to be dead. All around him, there was broken earth and above him, there it was.
The golden phoenix. 
It was the most beautiful creature Harry had ever laid eyes upon. It was immense, at least the size of an elephant, and it gave a radiant, golden glow that radiated throughout the entire field. It had what appeared to be white cloths revolving all around it, and they appeared to be carried by smaller golden phoenixes. Its eyes were exactly like Dumbldores, full of warmth and compassion, and the entire thing appeared to be made out of energy rather than matter. It was truly a sight to behold. No wonder Garde had fallen in love with it.
Harry Potter came a voice in Harrys head. It had to be the Phoenix, only a voice that silky and beautiful could belong to a creature that magnificent. Is this the creature that prevented you from using your Order?
You mean Voldemort? stuttered Harry.
Yes it said.
Yes, that is him, said Harry, still in awe at the awesome beast.
Throughout the entire existence of the Order, said the phoenix, something like this has never occurred. No one has ever stolen someone elses Order.
Well what can we do? asked Harry.
We cannot take the power of the Order away from him, said the phoenix, still hovering there, slowly flapping its wings, that is impossible. However, we can still do the next best thing give you back your Order.
You mean, said Harry, shocked and amazed, that I can use my Order again?
Yes. Since you did not use it on who you desired before, it is only right that you get it back.
Th- thank you phoenix, said Harry.
I am sorry, Harry Potter, said the phoenix, but I must leave you now my kind needs me. And I am even sorrier to say, that I cannot allow you to kill this Voldemort.
But, why not!? yelled Harry. The phoenix looked almost hurt by his response. I am sorry, Harry. Even though he stole your Order, I cannot allow you to kill him. The Order was created to bring life, not to steal it.
Before Harry could say another word, the phoenix disappeared, along with Voldemort. Instantly, they were gone, returning the ground and everything around them back to exactly the way it was before. All Harry could do was slowly bring himself down on the ground, sit down, lie down, close his eyes, and faint.


Chapter 31- The Surprise Order
Harry! Harry! yelled a voice. It rang through Harrys head, bouncing and echoing all the way. It made his head hurt all over, and he felt as though his face his going to split open. Harry immediately snapped back into consciousness and sat up.
Ah! he yelled as soon as he sat up and started rubbing his forehead. Ron put his hand on Harrys back to prevent him from falling over.
Are you okay? he asked.
Yeah, groaned Harry. The pain was throbbing now, on and off every second or so. The only thing that helped was to rub it.
What happened? asked Ron, removing his hand from Harrys back. 
Im not really sure, said Harry, but I think the Golden Phoenix that started the Order appeared, and took Voldemort away.
Whoa, exclaimed Ron. Are you sure?
Arg, winced Harry, trying to stand up. Im not sure wheres Hermione? Maybe we can ask her what she saw? At these words, Ron gave Harry an expression that was an odd combination of surprise, confusion, and sadness.
Harry Hermiones dead, said Ron slowly. Remember?
It was all coming back to Harry now. His Order failing, the duels with Voldemort, him being Dumbledore, and then the phoenix saving him with Hermione and Lupin being killed in the process.
Oh Ron what are we going to do? said Harry, covering his face with his hands. Shes dead, were lost, and for all we know, Voldemort is just waiting for us to go back into that forest and walk right into another one of his traps.
Well I know one thing we have to do, said Ron, looking more serious than Harry had ever seen, We have to bury her, just like You-Know Voldemort did with Colin.
But Ron, dont you think we should bring her back to her family? asked Harry.
No, he said. Harry, the chances of us getting back are slim to none. We got lucky that last time with the phoenix showing up, but we cant count on it again. If we get killed, Hermione will never have a proper burial, and she will just be eaten by worms and birds. We have to do this.
Harry looked at his friend, seeing him in a new light. He had grown up from the Ron Weasley he once knew. 
But if were going to bury Hermione, said Harry, we have to do the same for Lupin. After all, if it wasnt for him, we may not even be alive right now. He died trying to save us.
Alright, Ron said quickly and quietly. After a few seconds of just standing there, right in the middle of an infinite field, with a cloudy and windy sky overhead, giving the feeling of a storm coming on, they both came to a silent and simultaneous agreement. They both walked over to their friends, and collapsed on their knees next to them. They mumbled a spell, and the tips of their wands turned into quite large shovels. Harry and Ron began digging into the ground, none of them saying a word, just letting the wind say everything they had to.
Harry wasnt used to the silence. It was extremely eerie, like being in a dark and haunted house, just waiting for something to jump out from behind you and bite your head off. He had to break it.
Ron, said Harry, still digging, did you that is Hermione did you love her? At first, Harry thought Ron hadnt heard him. He just continued shoveling for a few seconds, then he paused, looked at Harry, and dropped his shovel.
Harry he said. I I I. Wait. Whats that sound?
Harry stopped digging for a second, and put his hand to his ear. Just beyond the sound of the oncoming thunder and rain, Harry heard the most out of place sound he heard an oink.
It sounds like a pig, said Harry, giving a confused look. He stood up, and stuck his ear out further in the direction he heard it coming from; he saw Ron do the same. 
Oink came the noise from very far away. It was just slightly louder than a pin drop, and Harry wasnt even sure if it was a real sound.
Oink. There it was again! Only louder this time, much louder in fact, as if it was rushing towards he and Ron. Harry began walking closer toward the sound, and Ron followed him. Whatever was making that noise was definitely coming closer. Harry had to be prepared: he took out his wand.
Oink.
Ron, said Harry, almost laughing at himself, I think it is a pig.
A pig?
Oink! came the sound again, sounding very close.
Harry! yelled Ron. It is a pig! He ran right up next to Harry, and put his hand over his eyes, to try and see farther away. Harry did the same, and not too far away, he saw a small pink dot next a to larger blue dot running up to them, along with a red dot above them.
What are those things around the pig? asked Ron, squinting. Harry tried to focus on it, and was amazed at what he saw. As the figures got closer, he could definitely make out the pink spot being a pig, but the blue dot was not it was a wizard! Harry could make out the long, blue flowing robe. And the red dot was a bird a phoenix!
Harry! yelled Ron. Its Dumbledore and the phoenix!
Ron was right, it was Dumbledore! The figures were no more than a hundred feet away now, and Harry could see them perfectly. Harry and Ron began running towards them, unable to believe their luck.
Professor Dumbledore! yelled Harry. Is that you!?
Yes it is, Harry, he said, stopping when he was just a few feet away from Harry. The phoenix was perched on his shoulder, that was probably Fawkes.
Even though Dumbledore wasnt wearing his usual, joyous face, Harry was still unbelievably happy to see him. He could have hugged Dumbledore, right then and there. With him around, there was no way Voldemort could touch them. 
Where is Voldemort? said Dumbledore.
Hes gone, said Harry, questions forming inside his head. How did Dumbledore know they were here? What was with the pig? How did he get the phoenixes back?
Hes gone, has he? Well that is most unfortunate.
There was a second of awkward silence.
Professor, how did you know we were here? said Ron, asking Harrys question for him. 
That is all thanks to this pig here, said Dumbledore. Or, as you know her, Mrs. Arabella Figg. She led me to the forest where I met Voldemort. He turned into a copy of me, and ran away. We tried to follow him, but we somehow lost him. Later, we heard the song of the golden phoenix, and followed it here.
Oh, thats right! said Harry. Wormtail didnt kill Arabella, he just turned her into a pig, and she ran away!
Wormtail killed someone? said Dumbledore, looking extremely serious.
Yes, said Harry, He killed Lupin, and Voldemort stunned Sirius, and killed Hermione and Colin.
Colin Creevey?
Yes.
Oh my oh my.
Just then, the pig flashed a bright white, and Mrs. Figg was standing right in front of Harry, just as she had appeared before, not a hoof in sight.
Mrs. Figg! said Harry. Youre back!
Harry, she said, you didnt think Id stay that way forever now did you?
Err I guess not said Harry, not really knowing what he thought. Whether or not she was going to transform back was really one of the last things on his mind. All he wanted to deal with now was Hermione, Lupin, and Colin but what could he do for them? Nothing he had already used his Order and- but wait!
Mrs. Figg! yelled Harry excitedly. I remember, just before Voldemort was about to kill me, that Golden Phoenix who started the Order appeared, and he took him away! Then, he told me that I could have my Order back since I didnt get to use it on who I wanted to! Mrs. Figgs eyes widened.
So that means you can rescue either Hermione or Lupin! she said.
Yes! And- Harry stopped being excited. Mrs. Figgs last statement hit him like a rock, only much, much more painful.
He was going to have to choose whether to bring back Hermione or Lupin.
What is it Harry? asked Ron, looking excited.
I can only bring one of them back, said Harry in a monotone voice, and not blinking. I have to choose which one to bring back
And youre going to have to choose quickly, said Mrs. Figg, looking at her watch. Theres a very small window of a little less than two hours to revive someone thats died by using an Order. From my estimates, you have only a few minutes.
Harrys mind was racing. He had a few minutes to choose which life was more valuable: one of his best and smartest friends, or a fully trained and invincible werewolf. How could he be expected to make this difficult of a choice?
Arabella said Harry, I think you need to decide for me I I cant.
Harry, she whispered, this is something that you have to do.
Harry turned back to the two bodies of Hermione and Lupin, laying side by side from when he and Ron were beginning to bury them. He tried to imagine an invisible numerical rating above each corpse, giving him the value of their life.
No! That was wrong! How could he rate someones life? Who was he to make this type of decision? Who was he to play god? No matter which choice he made, it would be right and yet it would be wrong.
Harry Ron whispered into his ear. Harry could tell, from not even looking at him that he was on the verge of crying. Harry I did love her
Harry closed his eyes tight, to try and not burst into tears. That settled it he had to choose her.
Liberate Hermione ex inferis! Harry yelled. He throw his arms out toward her body, and felt the phoenix soar past him, and begin to fly over her body. Another phoenix quickly appeared out of nowhere, and joined Fawkes in circling her.
Liberate Hermione ex inferis! he yelled again. The white energy flowed from his palms to Hermiones corpse, and the phoenixes were flying madly, just like before. Harry could feel the life force flowing through him, it made him feel alive all over, like he was being born again.
Hermiones limp body began to hover into the air, in the middle of the circle the soaring phoenixes were making in the air. She began to rotate, and give off a bright, white glow. The phoenixes stopped flying around her, and instantly froze where it was. But, Hermione kept on spinning, faster and faster, the light she gave off became brighter and brighter until. It all went away.
Instantly, all of it, the white light, the energy, everything, it all went away. Hermione fell to the ground.
Ouch! she moaned when her body came into contact with the earth. She rubbed her forehead and slowly opened her eyes. Wh- where am I? Ron went running over to her and immediately embraced her in a massive hug.
Harry couldnt help but smile, he felt as though he had made the right choice but Lupin was still dead.
Oh, Remus cried Mrs. Figg. She ran over to him, and hugged him, just as Ron had. Harry began to feel guilty inside had he made the best decision? He just chose the one he was better friends with, just like he had done before when trying to figure out who to let on the Quidditch team: Bill or Ron. He chose the one whom his other friend liked did that really mean he should have chosen her. If only he could have brought them both back.
Harry looked over at Dumbledore, who had been silent throughout the entire thing. Then, Harry remembered, Dumbledore didnt know about the Order! He had no idea what was going on! Even so he should still know whether or not he had made the right decision.
Um Professor Dumbledore said Harry, do you think I made the right decision? Dumbledore continued to just look ahead, not at anything in particular, but mostly in the direction of the storm coming. 
Oh Harry he said quietly and slowly. He started walking towards Lupin, his hands folded together. Harry wondered what he was doing. He followed him until he was just a few feet away from Lupin. He closed his eyes, and put out his arms so that they were right above Lupin. What was he doing?
Harry he said again, very slowly and quietly, I am part of the Order of the Phoenix.
Chapter 32- Truth and True Correspondents
Harrys mind exploded. What was going on!? Was Dumbledore playing some sort of cruel joke!? No, that wasnt like him at all maybe there was an infinitesimally small chance maybe he was really part of the Order
Liberate Remus ex inferis, Dumbledore said extremely slowly.
Just as with Harry before, white energy flowed from Dumbldores palms to Lupins body below. The phoenixes flew over above Lupin now, and began circling above his body, faster and faster, more and more white energy was created. Lupin began rising up from the ground, and right in the middle of the circle created. He flashed a brilliant white, for only an instant, then it all disappeared, just as it did before. Lupin crashed down to the ground.
Ouch! he yelled, just like Hermione, showing that he was very much alive.
Remus? said Mrs. Figg, taking her face out of her hands. She looked up, and saw Lupin there, rubbing his head.
Where am I? he said.
Remus! she yelled again, running up to him and hugging him.
All Harry could do was stand there, mouth open and eyes wide. It took Dumbledore touching him on the shoulder to bring him back to reality.
Well Harry, he said, the familiar joy back in his voice and eyes, are you happy now?
Harry looked before him. He saw Ron and Hermione embracing each other like never before and the same with Arabella and Remus. Leave it to being on the brink of death to bring people closer together. Harry couldnt help but feel happy for them.
Yes yes I am. said Harry dazed. Then, snapping back, he said, Professor I didnt know you were part of the Order of the Phoenix.
Oh yes said Dumbledore, talking about it like it was a child he was not especially proud of. I am Grades great-great-great-grandson. I used to be proud to be a member of the Order, until they started killing people.
Killing? asked Harry. I thought you could only help people with Orders.
Oh yes, of course you can only help people with an Order, Harry, said Dumbledore. However, when you bring someone back from the dead, are you not killing them in the afterlife? Just as sending someone in this reality to the afterlife is considered murder, isnt taking someone away from it and bringing here the same thing? You, Harry should know that the afterlife does, in fact exist.
How would I know, professor?
Arabella here told me of your exceptional job with the Advanced Defense Against the Dark Arts O.W.L. As you may know, you are not the first person in history to have put off pain for so long. You see, when someone concentrates on happiness so much while putting off imaginary pain, if they are good enough, they become enveloped in bliss, and a given a glimpse of the world that lay beyond ours. The place that you went, Harry, was, indeed, a piece of Heaven.
This information hit Harry hard. He had never even thought about death like that before. Is bringing people back from the dead killing them in the afterlife? Is Heaven really like what he saw it as?
As I said before, Harry, to the organized mind, death is just but the next great adventure. Why would you take someone away from it? I teach all of my most valuable people that death is to be respected just as much, if not more, than life. You, Harry, are one of my most valuable people.
Harry just stood there, in silence, having no idea what to say. He was amazed by this mans brilliance, and by Harrys own inability to see beyond two dimensions.
Oh my! exclaimed Dumbledore, looking at his watch. The end of school feast is going to begin in five minutes! We will have to hurry back if we are to get there in time!
Do you know how to get back, professor? asked Harry. This place doesnt exactly look like Hogwarts grounds.
Thats because its not, said Dumbledore. Hogwarts is on the other side of the forest, and theres absolutely no way well make it in time if we run. Well have to Apparate.
But professor, said Harry, Me, Ron and Hermione dont know how.
Oh dont worry about that. I have enough magical power for all of you. Just hold onto my hand. Arabella! You can surely Apparate to the entrance of Hogwarts with Lupin and Sirius, cant you?
Certainly, she said, holding Lupin on one shoulder, and propping Sirius (who was just waking up) on her other. Ron and Hermione came over, and they took a hold of Harrys hand, who was holding onto Dumbledore.
Well then off we go! yelled Dumbledore. Harry gasped. All of the world around him turned pitch black for an instant, melting everything into one infinite oblivion. Then, just as quick as it happened, it was over.
Harry felt out of breath, as if he had jogged the entire distance here.
Alright then Harry? asked Dumbledore, letting go of his hand.
Yeah, great, said Harry, catching his breath. He stood up and brushed himself off, and walked inside along with everyone else. Mrs. Figg, Sirius, and Lupin, however stayed outside, as to not be noticed. As they walked inside, two questions were still burning inside Harrys mind.
Professor Dumbledore, he asked, I have a question.
Ask away Harry, he said.
Well for one how did my Order help Voldemort? I mean, I thought it could only help you if you were hurt, and he looked perfectly healthy to me.
Oh Harry, an Order is much more complex than that. You should see the MMSC for it, oh boy! I could barely make sense of it!
Harry didnt feel like asking what an MMSC was, it would probably only confuse him more.
Anyway, Harry, an Order will work on anyone, young or old, dead or perfectly healthy. It does not restore someone to their normal health, because if it was used on someone who had been hurt, but was hurt anyway beforehand, they would return to their normal and hurt state. So, it amplifies your normal state, and then returns you to that.
Now, to do more advanced spells, you need more magical power, a power that is derived almost directly from your state of being. So, if you have had an Order put on you, you will have an even higher magical power. And if you already had a massive amount of magical power, as in the case of Voldemort, it will grow to a size that is off any chart I know. Now that Voldemort has this almost infinite magical power, he can invent any spell he wants, and utilize it any way he desires.
So, hes pretty much invincible now? asked Harry, beginning to feel afraid inside.
Oh no, Harry. As you have seen, almost every time Voldemort has been defeated it is because he has made just one error, or underestimated his opponents. Those are his faults. As long as he continues in his current state of mind, no matter what kind of spells he has at his disposal, there will be a way to defeat him.
Also, professor, how did you know to use your Order on Lupin? I didnt ask you to. Did you just figure it out yourself?
Well, mostly yes, Harry. But, as Im sure youve found out by now, all Animagi are connected through telepathy. I could hear your cry for help loud and clear.
With the end of that sentence, they had reached the entrance to the Great Hall. Dumbledore threw open the doors of the Great Hall, revealing all of Hogwarts school everyone except the four of them that is. Harry, Ron and a very confused looking Hermione sat down at the Gryffindor table, and Dumbledore ran to the head of the room. Just as he sat down in his great chair, though, he sat up again, to give his speech.
Once again another year has passed us, quickly for some not fast enough for others, he said, looking at Fred and Georges general direction. We have all accomplished much this year, and you should all be proud of what you have done, no matter how large or small you may think your accomplishments were.
There was some applause, and he began again.
Also, I would like to announce that the new Minister of Magic is in this room right now.
Everyone excitedly looked at the teachers at the front of the room. Everyone had been waiting for this moment for a long time. Harry tallied off the teachers than ran in his head, seeing which ones ran for the position, and which ones didnt. But, he deduced quickly, none of them ran none of them except for
Me, said Dumbledore. There was an explosion of applause, and everyone in the room (except for some of the Slytherins) stood up and cheered. It was accolade like Harry had never seen before. Had all of them really wanted Dumbledore to win? Not that he had any doubt in his mind that Dumbledore was, by far, the best candidate.
Yes, yes and, for my first acts as Minister of Magic, I hereby decree these three things! Number one: school shall begin one week later than usual I think we could all use a bit more vacation.
There was applause and whistles coming from all over. Even the Slytherins cheered for Dumbledore this time. In fact, the only ones who werent applauding were Fred and George.
Oh man, they said, the first time they give us extra vacation and we cant take advantage of it!
Second! Dumbledore continued. I hereby allow all Hogwarts students to take their wands home over the Summer holiday, and allow them to use whatever magic they want as long as its not an illegal spell.
If Harry thought the cheering for the last decree had been huge, it was nothing compared to this. Once again, only Fred and George looked miserable.
And lastly, said Dumbledore, I will NOT allow any more of these disgusting cover-ups of Voldemorts terrible and inhuman acts of violence!
There was no applause. Everyone had expected some sort of new and fun gift, this took them totally by surprise.
And as my first way of not covering up his actions, I shall tell you the reason why I am late to this feast.
Oh no, though Harry to himself. Hes going to say what happened
There was an attack on three students and a teacher earlier, and it was done by none other than Voldemort himself, along with one of his cohorts. If it had not been due to some extreme bravery by certain students more than one member of this school would have died in that past two hours.
Everyone in the room turned white and began frantically looking around the room to see who was missing. That would be the person that was dead. Harry put his head down, anticipating the moment when they would figure it out. It wasnt long before Colins little brother, Dennis, stood up and screamed.
COLIN! he yelled at the top of his lungs until he was red in the face. The tiny boy ran out of the room crying, everybody in the room watching him go.
Yes, said Dumbledore, Colin Creevey is dead. Though many of you may not have known him, I can assure you, he died the most honorable of deaths: sacrificing his own life so that another may live. So like Cedric Diggory last year, let us all raise our glasses to Colin Colin Creevey!
To Colin! everyone in the room said at the same time. Even though it was by far the most extravagant and delicious feast Harry had ever attended, and even though there were Gryffindor banners and colors everywhere from them winning the House Cup for the fifth year in a row, it was also the most quiet and solemn feast he had ever been to. No one dared to say a word no one.
The day of the feast came and went, and the last day of school finally arrived. Everyone was waiting outside of Hogwarts, right where the Hogwarts Express would come and pick them up, to take them home for the summer vacation. 
Harry stood there, talking with Ron, Hermione, and Cho, waiting for the train to come, when he felt someone behind him. He turned around, and saw two Muggles he had never seen before. One was a tall and thin man, with a large moustache and almost a completely bald head. The other was a short and skinny woman with long, brown hair. They were both crying, and looking down at Harry.
Are you are you Harry Potter? asked the man.
Yes, said Harry, not really knowing how to feel.
We were Colins parents, he said.
Oh oh my, said Harry, Im so sorry about Colin.
Its not your fault, said the woman, blowing her nose. Harry felt terrible inside it WAS his fault. We just wanted to see the boy that out son loved so much yes. He chose a great person to idolize.
Harry was speechless. He felt like an idiot as he watched them walk away. He saw them return to Dumbledore, and he waved to him. He had evidently told them where Harry was so they could see him at least, but he hadnt told him why Colin had really died he didnt tell anyone really. He didnt want anyone to think it was Harrys fault that he died, he just left it at the fact that he sacrificed himself for someone, and died honorably.
Harry turned around, expecting to see train tracks, but instead came face to face with Bill, the boy who had tried out for the Gryffindor Quidditch team at the beginning of the year. 
Hello Harry, he said, looking especially happy.
Oh hello Bill, said Harry, trying to quickly change his emotion from mournful to happy. How are you?
Oh Im fine been practicing my Quidditch, he said, rubbing his hands together. Youre going to need another new five players next year and hey! Why not me? I almost made it this year after all!
Im sure youll make it next year, said Harry, extending his arm to Bill. He took it and shook it vigorously, with a wide smile on his face. As he shook up and down, Harry heard something fall onto the ground.
What was that? asked Harry. He let go of Bills hand, and looked down. Right next to Bills feet, on the ground, he saw a Snitch. Harry quickly picked it up, and held it in front of him, about to offer it to Bill.
Suddenly, spikes shot out of the Snitch, just like the one in the Quidditch final. Harry quickly let go of it before any of the spikes impaled his hand again, and let it fall to the ground. He looked up at Bills terrified face.
Harry I. I didnt mean to hurt you I mean um.
You switched the Snitches! said Harry, rubbing his hand.
Well I had to get revenge on you for what you did, said Bill seriously, sounding almost not aware of what he was saying.
What did I do to deserve that?
You fudged the results of the last tryout, the one that came down to either me or Ron. You changed the results so that your friend got on the team!
Suddenly, it all came together for Harry. The person who had been sending him letters all year hadnt been doing it because he knew that he stole Fawkes! Bill was writing them! And it was because of the tryouts!
So youve been writing those letters! Youre the one who had been threatening me all year long! yelled Harry.
Yes! I did it! yelled Bill, looking a little insane. Evidently, he was so proud that Harry hadnt figured out it was him, and he got away with revenge, that he was letting it go to his head. It was ingenious! It was a perfect plan! Ha ha ha ha ha! I did it!
Whats going on here? asked Dumbledore, breaking through the crowd to get to see what the disturbance was all about.
I DID IT! HA HA HA! yelled Bill, throwing his hands up into the air and causing everyone to look at him.
What did he do? asked Dumbledore.
He was the one who switched the Snitches at the Quidditch Final! said Harry. Hes the one who put me in the Hospital Wing! Hes been threatening me all year long!
Is this true? Dumbledore asked Bill.
Yes! I did it! All by myself! Isnt it amazing ingenious?
Why dont you come with me Bill? said Dumbledore, grabbing Bill by the arm and leading him back up to the castle. Dont worry Harry, he will be taken care of.
Okay professor, said Harry, watching him take Bill all the way back up to the castle. He wondered is he would be seeing Bill next year even if he did, he knew he was not going to be on the Gryffindor Quidditch team, that was for sure.
Some people are just so weird, said Hermione, turning away from Bill.
Yeah, like you, Harry! yelled Ron, unexpectedly.
What do you mean? asked Harry.
You changed the results of the race so that I got on the team! he yelled. How could you do that?
Um because Im your friend, said Harry.
I didnt want to get on the team because Im your friend, said Ron through gritted teeth. If Bill was better, you should have picked him!
But he wasnt better, it was a tie, said Harry.
It doesnt matter! You still- suddenly, Ron went stiff for a second, his eyes flashed, and his head hung down. He was showing all of the signs of someone who had just had their memory erased. Harry looked behind Ron, to see who could have put the spell on him, when he saw little Aylar, with his wand out.
Aylar! yelled Harry. Did you erase Rons memory?
Only the memory that you changed the results of the tryout, said Aylar, putting his wand back into his pocket.
Aylar! How could you do that!?
Harry, come on, he was practically about to kill you, and your friendship would be gone forever, said Aylar, crossing his arms.
But you and Ron Harry mumbled. He couldnt think of anything to say. He was appalled at what Aylar did, but was thankful that Ron had forgotten about the little incident. Yep, the latter definitely outweighed the con. Thanks Aylar.
Dont mention it. I do it all the time for them, he said, indicating the group of Gryffindor first years.
Hi Harry! they all yelled at once.
Over the summer, were all going to get together and practice Quidditch! said Chris excitedly.
Yeah, and maybe well be able to make the team next year, said Mike.
Oh my god! That would roxorz my soxorz! yelled Joe.
I dont know, the odds of getting hurt by a Bludger during a game are fairly high. According to my calculations, which are of course based on-
Harry just merely turned his attention away from them, thankful that he wouldnt have to see them for over three months. Hed need that time away to mentally prepare himself to have to deal with them for the rest of the entire year.
Hey Harry, the train is here, said Ron, tapping Harry on the shoulder. Harry put his arm around his friends, Ron, Hermione and Cho, and the four of them walked onto the train, leaving Hogwarts.
On the train, Harry, Ron, and Hermione got a room to themselves, while Cho decided to take some time and catch up with her old friends in another compartment. The four of them all talked about their year together as the train went along, taking them home. 
Hey Hermione, said Ron, looking like he had suddenly thought of something. Whatever happened to Krum? Remember? At the beginning of the year you said you two werent seeing each other anymore, and you wouldnt tell us why. Well now will you tell us?
Hermione put a smile on, and turned slightly red.
Oh fine, she said. Well, everything was going great at his house we were having lots of fun. I guess he thought we were having enough fun together to well.
What? asked Ron and Harry together.
To get married.
Harry and Ron burst out into uncontrollable laughter. 
He asked you to marry him? coughed Ron, several minutes later, sitting up and trying to recover from his laughing fit.
Yes he did, and I thought that was just too much of him. I didnt want to be with someone who was THAT spontaneous. So, I left him.
Wow Hermione, said Harry. Just wow
The rest of the trip went along that way, each of them remembering their fifth year, the good and the bad, the funny and the terrible. Finally, they arrived at Platform 9 ? , and they all got off.
See you Harry! said Hermione, running off to see her parents.
See you later Hermione! yelled Harry back.
Goodbye Harry, said Cho.
Goodbye Cho, said Harry, giving her a goodbye kiss as she went off to go home with her parents.
Harry, asked Ron, are you sure you wouldnt rather come home with us for the holidays?
Maybe later, Ron, said Harry, but first, I want to have some fun. The Dursleys dont know that Dudleys a wizard that will be a fun surprise.
       The two men appeared out of nowhere, a few yards apart in the narrow, moonlit 
lane. For a second they stood quite still, wands directed at each other's chests; then, 
recognizing each other, they stowed their wands beneath their cloaks and started walking 
briskly in the same direction. 
  "News?" asked the taller of the two. 
  "The best," replied Severus Snape. 
The lane was bordered on the left by wild, low-growing brambles, on the right by a high, 
neatly manicured hedge. The men's long cloaks flapped around their ankles as they 
marched. 
  "Thought I might be late," said Yaxley, his blunt features sliding in and out of sight as 
the branches of overhanging trees broke the moonlight. "It was a little trickier than I 
expected. But I hope he will be satisfied. You sound confident that your reception will be 
good?" 
  Snape nodded, but did not elaborate. They turned right, into a wide driveway that led 
off the lane. The high hedge curved into them, running off into the distance beyond the 
pair of imposing wrought-iron gates barring the mens way. Neither of them broke step: 
In silence both raised their left arms in a kind of salute and passed straight through, as 
though the dark metal was smoke. 
        The yew hedges muffled the sound of the mens footsteps. There was a rustle 
somewhere to their right: Yaxley drew his wand again pointing it over his companions 
head, but the source of the noise proved to be nothing more than a pure-white peacock, 
strutting majestically along the top of the hedge. 
        He always did himself well, Lucius. Peacocks  Yaxley thrust his wand back 
under his cloak with a snort. 
        A handsome manor house grew out of the darkness at the end of the straight drive, 
lights glinting in the diamond paned downstairs windows. Somewhere in the dark garden 
beyond the hedge a fountain was playing. Gravel crackled beneath their feet as Snape and 
Yaxley sped toward the front door, which swung inward at their approach, though 
nobody had visibly opened it. 
        The hallway was large, dimly lit, and sumptuously decorated, with a magnificent 
carpet covering most of the stone floor. The eyes of the pale-faced portraits on the wall 
followed Snape and Yaxley as they strode past. The two men halted at a heavy wooden 
door leading into the next room, hesitated for the space of a heartbeat, then Snape turned 
the bronze handle. 
        The drawing room was full of silent people, sitting at a long and ornate table. The 
rooms usual furniture had been pushed carelessly up against the walls. Illumination 
came from a roaring fire beneath a handsome marble mantelpiece surmounted by a gilded 
mirror. Snape and Yaxley lingered for a moment on the threshold. As their eyes grew 
accustomed to the lack of light, they were drawn upward to the strangest feature of the 
scene: an apparently unconscious human figure hanging upside down over the table, 
revolving slowly as if suspended by an invisible rope, and reflected in the mirror and in 
the bare, polished surface of the table below. None of the people seated underneath this 

singular sight were looking at it except for a pale young man sitting almost directly below 
it. He seemed unable to prevent himself from glancing upward every minute or so. 
         Yaxley. Snape, said a high, clear voice from the head of the table. You are 
very nearly late. 
         The speaker was seated directly in front of the fireplace, so that it was difficult, at 
first, for the new arrivals to make out more than his silhouette. As they drew nearer, 
however, his face shone through the gloom, hairless, snakelike, with slits for nostrils and 
gleaming red eyes whose pupils were vertical. He was so pale that he seemed to emit a 
pearly glow. 
         Severus, here, said Voldemort, indicating the seat on his immediate right. 
Yaxley  beside Dolohov. 
         The two men took their allotted places. Most of the eyes around the table 
followed Snape, and it was to him that Voldemort spoke first. 
         So? 
         My Lord, the Order of the Phoenix intends to move Harry Potter from his current 
place of safety on Saturday next, at nightfall. 
         The interest around the table sharpened palpably: Some stiffened, others fidgeted, 
all gazing at Snape and Voldemort. 
         Saturday  at nightfall, repeated Voldemort. His red eyes fastened upon 
Snapes black ones with such intensity that some of the watchers looked away, apparently 
fearful that they themselves would be scorched by the ferocity of the gaze. Snape, 
however, looked calmly back into Voldemorts face and, after a moment or two, 
Voldemorts lipless mouth curved into something like a smile. 
         Good. Very good. And this information comes  
           from the source we discussed, said Snape. 
         My Lord. 
         Yaxley had leaned forward to look down the long table at Voldemort and Snape. 
All faces turned to him. 
         My Lord, I have heard differently. 
         Yaxley waited, but Voldemort did not speak, so he went on, Dawlish, the Auror, 
let slip that Potter will not be moved until the thirtieth, the night before the boy turns 
seventeen. 
         Snape was smiling. 
         My source told me that there are plans to lay a false trail; this must be it. No 
doubt a Confundus Charm has been placed upon Dawlish. It would not be the first time; 
he is known to be susceptible. 
         I assure you, my Lord, Dawlish seemed quite certain, said Yaxley. 
         If he has been Confunded, naturally he is certain, said Snape. I assure you, 
Yaxley, the Auror Office will play no further part in the protection of Harry Potter. The 
Order believes that we have infiltrated the Ministry. 
         The Orders got one thing right, then, eh? said a squat man sitting a short 
distance from Yaxley; he gave a wheezy giggle that was echoed here and there along the 
table. 
         Voldemort did not laugh. His gaze had wandered upward to the body revolving 
slowly overhead, and he seemed to be lost in thought. 

         My Lord, Yaxley went on, Dawlish believes an entire party of Aurors will be 
used to transfer the boy  
         Voldemort held up a large white hand, and Yaxley subsided at once, watching 
resentfully as Voldemort turned back to Snape. 
         Where are they going to hide the boy next? 
         At the home of one of the Order, said Snape. The place, according to the 
source, has been given every protection that the Order and Ministry together could 
provide. I think that there is little chance of taking him once he is there, my Lord, unless, 
of course, the Ministry has fallen before next Saturday, which might give us the 
opportunity to discover and undo enough of the enchantments to break through the rest. 
         Well, Yaxley? Voldemort called down the table, the firelight glinting strangely 
in his red eyes. Will the Ministry have fallen by next Saturday? 
         Once again, all heads turned. Yaxley squared his shoulders. 
         My Lord, I have good news on that score. I have  with difficulty, and after great 
effort  succeeded in placing an Imperius Curse upon Pius Thicknesse. 
         Many of those sitting around Yaxley looked impressed; his neighbor, Dolohov, a 
man with a long, twisted face, clapped him on the back. 
         It is a start, said Voldemort. But Thicknesse is only one man. Scrimgeour must 
be surrounded by our people before I act. One failed attempt on the Ministers life will 
set me back a long way. 
         Yes  my Lord, that is true  but you know, as Head of the Department of 
Magical Law Enforcement, Thicknesse has regular contact not only with the Minister 
himself, but also with the Heads of all the other Ministry departments. It will, I think, be 
easy now that we have such a high-ranking official under our control, to subjugate the 
others, and then they can all work together to bring Scrimgeour down. 
         As long as our friend Thicknesse is not discovered before he has converted the 
rest, said Voldemort. At any rate, it remains unlikely that the Ministry will be mine 
before next Saturday. If we cannot touch the boy at his destination, then it must be done 
while he travels. 
         We are at an advantage there, my Lord, said Yaxley, who seemed determined to 
receive some portion of approval. We now have several people planted within the 
Department of Magical Transport. If Potter Apparates or uses the Floo Network, we shall 
know immediately. 
         He will not do either, said Snape. The Order is eschewing any form of 
transport that is controlled or regulated by the Ministry; they mistrust everything to do 
with the place. 
         All the better, said Voldemort. He will have to move in the open. Easier to 
take, by far. 
         Again, Voldemort looked up at the slowly revolving body as he went on, I shall 
attend to the boy in person. There have been too many mistakes where Harry Potter is 
concerned. Some of them have been my own. That Potter lives is due more to my errors 
than to his triumphs. 
         The company around the table watched Voldemort apprehensively, each of them, 
by his or her expression, afraid that they might be blamed for Harry Potters continued 
existence. Voldemort, however, seemed to be speaking more to himself than to any of 
them, still addressing the unconscious body above him. 

        I have been careless, and so have been thwarted by luck and chance, those 
wreckers of all but the best-laid plans. But I know better now. I understand those things 
that I did not understand before. I must be the one to kill Harry Potter, and I shall be. 
        At these words, seemingly in response to them, a sudden wail sounded, a terrible, 
drawn-out cry of misery and pain. Many of those at the table looked downward, startled, 
for the sound had seemed to issue from below their feet. 
        Wormtail, said Voldemort, with no change in his quiet, thoughtful tone, and 
without removing his eyes from the revolving body above, have I not spoken to you 
about keeping our prisoner quiet? 
        Yes, m-my Lord, gasped a small man halfway down the table, who had been 
sitting so low in his chair that it appeared, at first glance, to be unoccupied. Now he 
scrambled from his seat and scurried from the room, leaving nothing behind him but a 
curious gleam of silver. 
        As I was saying, continued Voldemort, looking again at the tense faces of his 
followers, I understand better now. I shall need, for instance, to borrow a wand from one 
of you before I go to kill Potter. 
        The faces around him displayed nothing but shock; he might have announced that 
he wanted to borrow one of their arms. 
        No volunteers? said Voldemort. Lets see  Lucius, I see no reason for you to 
have a wand anymore. 
        Lucius Malfoy looked up. His skin appeared yellowish and waxy in the firelight, 
and his eyes were sunken and shadowed. When he spoke, his voice was hoarse. 
        My Lord? 
        Your wand, Lucius. I require your wand. 
        I  
        Malfoy glanced sideways at his wife. She was staring straight ahead, quite as pale 
as he was, her long blonde hair hanging down her back, but beneath the table her slim 
fingers closed briefly on his wrist. At her touch, Malfoy put his hand into his robes, 
withdrew a wand, and passed it along to Voldemort, who held it up in front of his red 
eyes, examining it closely. 
        What is it? 
        Elm, my Lord, whispered Malfoy. 
        And the core? 
        Dragon  dragon heartstring. 
        Good, said Voldemort. He drew out his wand and compared the lengths. Lucius 
Malfoy made an involuntary movement; for a fraction of a second, it seemed he expected 
to receive Voldemorts wand in exchange for his own. The gesture was not missed by 
Voldemort, whose eyes widened maliciously. 
        Give you my wand, Lucius? My wand? 
        Some of the throng sniggered. 
        I have given you your liberty, Lucius, is that not enough for you? But I have 
noticed that you and your family seem less than happy of late  What is it about my 
presence in your home that displaces you, Lucius? 
        Nothing  nothing, my Lord! 
        Such lies Lucius   

        The soft voice seemed to hiss on even after the cruel mouth had stopped moving. 
One or two of the wizards barely repressed a shudder as the hissing grew louder; 
something heavy could be heard sliding across the floor beneath the table. 
        The huge snake emerged to climb slowly up Voldemorts chair. It rose, seemingly 
endlessly, and came to rest across Voldemorts shoulders: its neck the thickness of a 
mans thigh; its eyes, with their vertical slits for pupils, unblinking. Voldemort stroked 
the creature absently with long thin fingers, still looking at Lucius Malfoy. 
        Why do the Malfoys look so unhappy with their lot? Is my return, my rise to 
power, not the very thing they professed to desire for so many years? 
        Of course, my Lord, said Lucius Malfoy. His hand shook as he wiped sweat 
from his upper lip. We did desire it  we do. 
        To Malfoys left, his wife made an odd, stiff nod, her eyes averted from 
Voldemort and the snake. To his right, his son, Draco, who had been gazing up at the 
inert body overhead, glanced quickly at Voldemort and away again, terrified to make eye 
contact. 
My Lord, said a dark woman halfway down the table, her voice constricted with 
emotion, it is an honor to have you here, in our familys house. There can be no higher 
pleasure. 
        She sat beside her sister, as unlike her in looks, with her dark hair and heavily 
lidded eyes, as she was in bearing and demeanor; where Narcissa sat rigid and impassive, 
Bellatrix leaned toward Voldemort, for mere words could not demonstrate her longing for 
closeness. 
        No higher pleasure, repeated Voldemort, his head tilted a little to one side as he 
considered Bellatrix. That means a great deal, Bellatrix, from you. 
        Her face flooded with color; her eyes welled with tears of delight. 
        My Lord knows I speak nothing but the truth! 
        No higher pleasure  even compared with the happy event that, I hear, has 
taken place in your family this week? 
        She stared at him, her lips parted, evidently confused. 
        I dont know what you mean, my Lord. 
        Im talking about your niece, Bellatrix. And yours, Lucius and Narcissa. She has 
just married the werewolf, Remus Lupin. You must be so proud. 
        There was an eruption of jeering laughter from around the table. Many leaned 
forward to exchange gleeful looks; a few thumped the table with their fists. The giant 
snake, disliking the disturbance, opened its mouth wide and hissed angrily, but the Death 
Eaters did not hear it, so jubilant were they at Bellatrix and the Malfoys humiliation. 
Bellatrixs face, so recently flushed wit happiness, had turned an ugly, blotchy red. 
        She is no niece of ours, my Lord, she cried over the outpouring of mirth. We  
Narcissa and I  have never set eyes on our sister since she married the Mudblood. This 
brat has nothing to do with either of us, nor any beast she marries. 
        What say you, Draco? asked Voldemort, and though his voice was quiet, it 
carried clearly through the catcalls and jeers. Will you babysit the cubs? 
        The hilarity mounted; Draco Malfoy looked in terror at his father, who was 
staring down into his own lap, then caught his mothers eye. She shook her head almost 
imperceptibly, then resumed her own deadpan stare at the opposite wall. 
        Enough, said Voldemort, stroking the angry snake. Enough. 

        And the laughter died at once. 
        Many of our oldest family trees become a little diseased over time, he said as 
Bellatrix gazed at him, breathless and imploring, You must prune yours, must you not, 
to keep it healthy? Cut away those parts that threaten the health of the rest. 
        Yes, my Lord, whispered Bellatrix, and her eyes swam with tears of gratitude 
again. At the first chance! 
        You shall have it, said Voldemort. And in your family, so in the world  we 
shall cut away the canker that infects us until only those of the true blood remain  
        Voldemort raised Lucius Malfoys wand, pointed it directly at the slowly 
revolving figure suspended over the table, and gave it a tiny flick. The figure came to life 
with a groan and began to struggle against invisible bonds. 
        Do you recognize our guest, Severus? asked Voldemort. 
        Snape raised his eyes to the upside down face. All of the Death Eaters were 
looking up at the captive now, as though they had been given permission to show 
curiosity. As she revolved to face the firelight, the woman said in a cracked and terrified 
voice, Severus! Help me! 
        Ah, yes, said Snape as the prisoner turned slowly away again. 
        And you, Draco? asked Voldemort, stroking the snakes snout with his wand- 
free hand. Draco shook his head jerkily. Now that the woman had woken, he seemed 
unable to look at her anymore. 
        But you would not have taken her classes, said Voldemort. For those of you 
who do not know, we are joined here tonight by Charity Burbage who, until recently, 
taught at Hogwarts School of Witchcraft and Wizardry. 
        There were small noises of comprehension around the table. A broad, hunched 
woman with pointed teeth cackled. 
        Yes  Professor Burbage taught the children of witches and wizards all about 
Muggles  how they are not so different from us   
        One of the Death Eaters spat on the floor. Charity Burbage revolved to face Snape 
again. 
        Severus  please  please   
        Silence, said Voldemort, with another twitch of Malfoys wand, and Charity fell 
silent as if gagged. Not content with corrupting and polluting the minds of Wizarding 
children, last week Professor Burbage wrote an impassioned defense of Mudbloods in the 
Daily Prophet. Wizards, she says, must accept these thieves of their knowledge and 
magic. The dwindling of the purebloods is, says Professor Burbage, a most desirable 
circumstance  She would have us all mate with Muggles  or, no doubt, werewolves 
        Nobody laughed this time. There was no mistaking the anger and contempt in 
Voldemorts voice. For the third time, Charity Burbage revolved to face Snape. Tears 
were pouring from her eyes into her hair. Snape looked back at her, quite impassive, as 
she turned slowly away from him again. 
        Avada Kedavra 
        The flash of green light illuminated every corner of the room. Charity fell, with a 
resounding crash, onto the table below, which trembled and creaked. Several of the Death 
Eaters leapt back in their chairs. Draco fell out of his onto the floor. 

        Dinner, Nagini, said Voldemort softly, and the great snake swayed and slithered from his shoulders onto the polished wood. 
          Harry was bleeding. Clutching his right hand in his left and swearing under his 
breath, he shouldered open his bedroom door. There was a crunch of breaking china. He 
had trodden on a cup of cold tea that had been sitting on the floor outside his bedroom 
door. 

        "What the --?" 

        He looked around, the landing of number four, Privet Drive, was deserted. 
Possibly the cup of tea was Dudley's idea of a clever booby trap. Keeping his bleeding 
hand elevated, Harry scraped the fragments of cup together with the other hand and threw 
them into the already crammed bin just visible inside his bedroom door. Then he tramped 
across to the bathroom to run his finger under the tap. 

        It was stupid, pointless, irritating beyond belief that he still had four days left of 
being unable to perform magicbut he had to admit to himself that this jagged cut in his 
finger would have defeated him. He had never learned how to repair wounds, and now he 
came to think of it  particularly in light of his immediate plans  this seemed a serious 
flaw in his magical education. Making a mental note to ask Hermione how it was done, 
he used a large wad of toilet paper to mop up as much of the tea as he could before 
returning to his bedroom and slamming the door behind him. 

        Harry had spent the morning completely emptying his school trunk for the first 
time since he had packed it six years ago. At the start of the intervening school years, he 
had merely skimmed off the topmost three quarters of the contents and replaced or 
updated them, leaving a layer of general debris at the bottom  old quills, desiccated 
beetle eyes, single socks that no longer fit. Minutes previously, Harry had plunged his 
hand into this mulch, experienced a stabbing pain in the fourth finger of his right hand, 
and withdrawn it to see a lot of blood. 

        He now proceeded a little more cautiously. Kneeling down beside the trunk again, 
he groped around in the bottom and, after retrieving an old badge that flickered feebly 
between SUPPORT CEDRIC DIGGORY and POTTER STINKS, a cracked and worn-out 
Sneakoscope, and a gold locket inside which a note signed R.A.B. had been hidden, he 
finally discovered the sharp edge that had done the damage. He recognized it at once. It 
was a two-inch-long fragment of the enchanted mirror that his dead godfather, Sirius, had 
given him. Harry laid it aside and felt cautiously around the trunk for the rest, but nothing 

more remained of his godfather's last gift except powdered glass, which clung to the 
deepest layer of debris like glittering grit. 

        Harry sat up and examined the jagged piece on which he had cut himself, seeing 
nothing but his own bright green eye reflected back at him. Then he placed the fragment 
on top of that morning's Daily prophet, which lay unread on the bed, and attempted to 
stem the sudden upsurge of bitter memories, the stabs of regret and of longing the 
discovery of the broken mirror had occasioned, by attacking the rest of the rubbish in the 
trunk. 

        It took another hour to empty it completely, throw away the useless items, and 
sort the remainder in piles according to whether or not he would need them from now on. 
His school and Quidditch robes, cauldron, parchment, quills, and most of his textbooks 
were piled in a corner, to be left behind. He wondered what his aunt and uncle would do 
with them; burn them in the dead of night, probably, as if they were evidence of some 
dreadful crime. His Muggle clothing, Invisibility Cloak, potion-making kit, certain books, 
the photograph album Hagrid had once given him, a stack of letters, and his wand had 
been repacked into an old rucksack. In a front pocket were the Marauder's Map and the 
locket with the note signed R.A.B. inside it. The locket was accorded this place of honor 
not because it was valuable  in all usual senses it was worthless  but because of what it 
had cost to attain it. 

        This left a sizable stack of newspapers sitting on his desk beside his snowy owl, 
Hedwig: one for each of the days Harry had spent at Privet Drive this summer. 

        He got up off the floor, stretched, and moved across to his desk. Hedwig made no 
movement as he began to flick through newspapers, throwing them into the rubbish pile 
one by one. The owl was asleep or else faking; she was angry with Harry about the 
limited amount of time she was allowed out of her cage at the moment. 

        As he neared the bottom of the pile of newspapers, Harry slowed down, searching 
for one particular issue that he knew had arrived shortly after he had returned to Privet 
Drive for the summer; he remembered that there had been a small mention on the front 
about the resignation of Charity Burbage, the Muggle Studies teacher at Hogwarts. At 
last he found it. Turning to page ten, he sank into his desk chair and reread the article he 
had been looking for. 